---
title: "Page 0161"
outline: false
---

# Page 0161

[<- Page 0160](./page-0160) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0162 ->](./page-0162)

> Part 1: Introduction to functional programming / Chapter 6: Purely functional state / 6.7 Conclusion

Turning the knob on a locked machine or inserting a coin into an unlocked machine does nothing.

A machine that’s out of candy ignores all inputs.

The `simulateMachine` method should operate the machine based on the list of inputs and return the number of coins and candies left in the machine at the end. For example, if the input `Machine` has 10 coins and five candies, and a total of four candies are successfully bought, the output should be `(14,` `1)`:

```scala
def simulateMachine(inputs: List[Input]): State[Machine, (Int, Int)]
```

### 6.7 Conclusion

In this chapter, we touched on writing purely functional programs that have state. We used random number generation as the motivating example, but the overall pattern comes up in many different domains. The idea is simple: use a pure function that accepts a state as its argument, and it will return the new state alongside its result. Next time you encounter an imperative API that relies on side effects, see if you can provide a purely functional version of it, and then use some of the functions we wrote here to make working with it more convenient.

### Summary

The `scala.util.Random` type provides generation of pseudo-random numbers but performs generation as a side effect.

Pseudo-random number generation can be modeled as a pure function from an input seed to an output seed and a generated value.

Making stateful APIs pure by having the API compute the next state from the current state rather than actually mutating anything is a general technique not limited to pseudo-random number generation.

When the functional approach feels awkward or tedious, look for common patterns that can be factored out.

The `Rand[A]` type is an alias for a function `Rng` `=>` `(A,` `Rng)`. There are a variety of functions that create and transform `Rand` values, like `unit`, `map`, `map2`, `flat-` `Map`, and `sequence`.

Opaque types behave like type aliases in their defining scope but behave like unrelated types outside their defining scope. An opaque type encapsulates the relationship with the representation type, allowing the definition of new types without runtime overhead.

Extension methods can be used to add methods to opaque types.

Case classes can be used instead of opaque types, but they come with the runtime cost of wrapping the underlying value.

The `State[S,` `A]` type is an opaque alias for a function `S` `=>` `(A,` `S)`.

[<- Page 0160](./page-0160) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0162 ->](./page-0162)
