---
title: "Page 0005"
outline: false
---

# Page 0005

[<- Page 0004](./page-0004) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0006 ->](./page-0006)

> Praise for the First Edition

For online information and ordering of this and other Manning books, please visit www.manning.com. The publisher offers discounts on this book when ordered in quantity. For more information, please contact

Special Sales Department Manning Publications Co. 20 Baldwin Road PO Box 761 Shelter Island, NY 11964 Email: orders@manning.com

©2023 by Manning Publications Co. All rights reserved.

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, or otherwise, without prior written permission of the publisher.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in the book, and Manning Publications was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in initial caps or all caps.

Recognizing the importance of preserving what has been written, it is Manning’s policy to have the books we publish printed on acid-free paper, and we exert our best efforts to that end. Recognizing also our responsibility to conserve the resources of our planet, Manning books are printed on paper that is at least 15 percent recycled and processed without the use of elemental chlorine.

The author and publisher have made every effort to ensure that the information in this book was correct at press time. The author and publisher do not assume and hereby disclaim any liability to any party for any loss, damage, or disruption caused by errors or omissions, whether such errors or omissions result from negligence, accident, or any other cause, or from any usage of the information herein.

Manning Publications Co. Development editor: Dustin Archibald 20 Baldwin Road Technical development editor: Jerry Kuch PO Box 761 Review editor: Aleksandar Dragosavljević Shelter Island, NY 11964 Production editor: Deirdre Hiam Copy editor: Christian Berk Proofreader: Melody Dolab Technical proofreader: Jerry Kuch Typesetter: Gordan Salinovic Cover designer: Irene Scala

ISBN 9781617299582 Printed in the United States of America

[<- Page 0004](./page-0004) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0006 ->](./page-0006)
