---
title: "Page 0015"
outline: false
---

# Page 0015

[<- Page 0014](./page-0014) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0016 ->](./page-0016)

> foreword to the first edition

## foreword to the first edition

*Functional Programming in Scala* is an intriguing title. After all, Scala is generally called a functional programming language, and there are dozens of books about Scala on the market. Are all these other books missing the functional aspects of the language? To answer the question, it’s instructive to dig a bit deeper. What is *functional program-*ming*? For me, it’s simply an alias for *programming with functions*—that is, a programming style that puts the focus on the functions in a program. What are *functions*? Here we find a larger spectrum of definitions. While one definition often admits functions that may have side effects in addition to returning a result, pure functional programming restricts functions to be as they are in mathematics: binary relations that map arguments to results. Scala is an impure functional programming language in that it admits impure as well as pure functions and in that it does not try to distinguish between these categories by using different syntax or giving them different types. It shares this property with most other functional languages. It would be nice if we could distinguish between pure and impure functions in Scala, but I believe we have not yet found a way to do so that is lightweight and flexible enough to be added to Scala without hesitation. To be sure, Scala programmers are generally encouraged to use pure functions. Side effects such as mutation, I/O, or using exceptions are not ruled out, and they can indeed come in quite handy sometimes, be it for reasons of interoperability, efficiency, or convenience. But overusing side effects is generally not considered good style by experts. Nevertheless, since impure programs are possible—and even convenient to write—in Scala, there is a temptation for programmers coming from a more

**xiv**

[<- Page 0014](./page-0014) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0016 ->](./page-0016)
