---
title: "Page 0413"
outline: false
---

# Page 0413

[<- Page 0412](./page-0412) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0414 ->](./page-0414)

> Part 4: Effects and I/O / Chapter 13: External effects and I/O / 13.6 Capabilities

We then provide given instances of this trait for each target monad we want to support:

```scala
given parConsole: Console[Par] with
def readLn =
Par.lazyUnit(Try(readLine()).toOption)
def printLn(line: String) =
Par.lazyUnit(println(line))
given thunkConsole: Console[Function0] with
def readLn =
() => Try(readLine()).toOption
def printLn(line: String) =
() => println(line)
```

These instances are analagous to the interpreters we wrote for `Free` algebras, but note that we’re not first constructing a `Free` program and then later interpreting it. Instead, we’re directly creating instances of our target monad using given instances. When building `Free` programs, the `Free` data type provided the ability to sequence multiple operations. What’s providing the sequencing functionality with this capability trait approach? The target monad provides it directly! This becomes evident when we use a capability trait. Let’s define the same greeting program we defined earlier— this time with the `Console[F]` capability trait:

```scala
def greet[F[_]](using c: Console[F], m: Monad[F]): F[Unit] =
for
_ <- c.printLn("What's your name?")
n <- c.readLn
_ <- n match
case Some(n) => c.printLn(s"Hello, $n!")
case None => c.printLn(s"Fine, be that way.")
yield ()
```

The `greet` function is now defined for an abstract target monad `F`, which has both a `Console` and `Monad` instance. In the body of the function, we construct console operations by calling `c.printLn` and `c.readLn`, and we sequence those actions using the given `Monad[F]` instance. Without the `Monad[F]` context parameter, we’d be unable to call `flatMap` on the result of `printLn` and `readLn`, since we wouldn’t know any details about the type `F`. We say `Console` imbues the type constructor `F` with the ability to perform console operations, while `Monad` imbues `F` with sequencing (i.e., `flatMap`). Instead of passing free algebras around, we pass abstract effectful programs. When we eventually want to execute our program, we instantiate it for a concrete effect (e.g., `greet[Function0]`) and execute the resulting concrete monad. How about composition? Let’s revisit the definition of `cat`—this time defined with capability traits:

[<- Page 0412](./page-0412) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0414 ->](./page-0414)
