---
title: "Page 0294"
outline: false
---

# Page 0294

[<- Page 0293](./page-0293) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0295 ->](./page-0295)

> Part 3: Common structures in functional design / Chapter 10: Monoids / 10.6 Foldable data structures

## 265 10.6 Foldable data structures

```scala
val intMultiplication: Monoid[Int] = new:
def combine(a1: Int, a2: Int) = a1 * a2
val empty = 1
given string: Monoid[String] with
def combine(a1: String, a2: String) = a1 + a2
val empty = ""
val booleanOr: Monoid[Boolean] = new:
def combine(x: Boolean, y: Boolean) = x || y
val empty = false
val booleanAnd: Monoid[Boolean] = new:
def combine(x: Boolean, y: Boolean) = x && y
val empty = true
```

Here we’ve defined `intAddition` as the canonical `Monoid[Int]`, while providing `intMultiplication` as a regular value. Likewise, we’ve defined a canonical instance for `Monoid[String]`. We provided `booleanOr` and `booleanAnd` as regular values since neither are good default values. When we call a function that uses context parameters, we can supply our own instances instead of given instances via the `using` keyword. For example

```scala
val allPositive = foldMap(List(1, 2, 3))(_ > 0)(using Monoid.booleanAnd)
val existsNegative = foldMap(List(1, 2, 3))(_ < 0)(using Monoid.booleanOr)
```

See the official documentation for more details about givens (https://mng.bz/Bx02) and context parameters (https://mng.bz/do7w). Let’s review what we’ve done here. We have a parameterized trait—`Monoid[A]`— and default, or canonical, instances of that trait for various types. We also have generic functions that take instances of our trait as context parameters. This is the essence of the *typeclass* pattern—a trait with a single type parameter and some number of given instances. The typeclass pattern provides a form of ad hoc polymorphism—that is, the ability to define an interface independent from the definition of a type and then adapt such types to the interface. For the remainder of this chapter, we’ll use `Monoid` as a typeclass instead of as a plain value; we’ll pass monoids as context parameters and define instances as givens instead of values.

### 10.6 Foldable data structures

In chapter 3, we implemented the data structures `List` and `Tree`, both of which could be folded. In chapter 5, we wrote `LazyList`, a lazy structure that can be folded much like a `List` can, and now we’ve just written a fold for `IndexedSeq`. When we’re writing code that needs to process data contained in one of these structures, we often don’t care about the shape of the structure (i.e., whether it’s a tree or a list), whether it’s lazy, whether it provides efficient random access, and so

[<- Page 0293](./page-0293) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0295 ->](./page-0295)
