---
title: "Page 0471"
outline: false
---

# Page 0471

[<- Page 0470](./page-0470) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0472 ->](./page-0472)

> Part 4: Effects and I/O / Chapter 15: Stream processing and incremental I/O / 15.4 Applications

Can these capabilities be incorporated into our definition of `Stream` in a way that preserves resource safety? Yes, they can! We actually already have the power to do these things, using the `flatMap` combinator we’ve already defined for an arbitrary `Stream` type. For instance, `flatMap` plus our existing combinators let us write this first scenario as follows:

```scala
def convertAll(inputFile: String, outputFile: String): Task[Unit] =
lines(inputFile)
.flatMap(lines).pipe(conversion).pipe(writeLines(outputFile)).run
```

This code is completely resource safe, meaning all file handles will be closed automatically by the runner as soon as they’re finished, even in the presence of exceptions. We can write to multiple files just by switching the order of the calls to `flatMap`:

```scala
def convertMultisink(inputFile: String): Task[Unit] =
lines(inputFile).flatMap(file =>
lines(file).pipe(conversion).pipe(writeLines(file + ".celsius"))).run
```

### 15.4 Applications

The ideas presented in this chapter are widely applicable. A surprising number of programs can be cast in terms of stream processing—once you’re aware of the abstraction, you begin to see it everywhere. Let’s look at some domains where it’s applicable:

*File I/O*—We’ve already demonstrated how to use stream processing for file I/O. Although we’ve focused on line-by-line reading and writing for the examples here, we can also use the library for processing binary files.

*Message processing, state machines, and actors*—Large systems are often organized as a system of loosely coupled components that communicate via message passing. These systems are often expressed in terms of *actors*, which communicate via explicit message sends and receives. We can express components in these architectures as stream computations, which lets us describe extremely complex state machines and behaviors using a high-level, compositional API.

*Servers and web applications*—A web application can be thought of as converting a stream of HTTP requests to a stream of HTTP responses.

*UI programming*—We can view individual UI events such as mouse clicks as streams, and the UI as one large network of stream computations determining how the UI responds to user interaction.

*Big data and distributed systems*—Stream-processing libraries can be distributed and parallelized for processing large amounts of data. The key insight here is that the nodes of a stream-processing network need not all live on the same machine.

[<- Page 0470](./page-0470) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0472 ->](./page-0472)
