---
title: "Page 0406"
outline: false
---

# Page 0406

[<- Page 0405](./page-0405) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0407 ->](./page-0407)

> Part 4: Effects and I/O / Chapter 13: External effects and I/O / 13.5 Non-blocking and asynchronous I/O

## 377 13.5 Non-blocking and asynchronous I/O

`Free[Console,` `A]` programs, we can’t know (and don’t care) whether they’re going to be run with an interpreter that uses real side effects, like `unsafeRunConsole`, or one, like `toState`, that doesn’t. As far as we’re concerned, a program is just a referentially transparent expression—a pure computation that may occasionally make requests of some interpreter. The interpreter is free to use side effects or not. That’s now an entirely separate concern.

### 13.5 Non-blocking and asynchronous I/O

Let’s turn our attention now to the last remaining problem with our original `IO` monad: performing non-blocking or asynchronous I/O. When performing I/O, we frequently need to invoke operations that take a long time to complete and don’t occupy the CPU. These include accepting a network connection from a server socket, reading a chunk of bytes from an input stream, writing a large number of bytes to a file, and so on. Let’s think about what this means in terms of the implementation of our `Free` interpreter. When `unsafeRunConsole`, for example, encounters a `Suspend(s)`, `s` will be of `Console` type, and we’ll have a translation `f` from `Console` to the target monad. To allow for non-blocking asynchronous I/O, we simply change the target monad from `Function0` to `Par` or another concurrency monad, such as `scala.concurrent.Future`. So just as we were able to write both pure and effectful interpreters for `Console`, we can write both blocking and non-blocking interpreters as well, just by varying the target monad.14

Let’s look at an example. Here `toPar` will turn the `Console` requests into `Par` actions and then combine them all into one `Par[A]`. We can think of it as a kind of compilation—we’re replacing the abstract `Console` requests with more concrete `Par` requests that will actually read from and write to the standard input and output streams when the resulting `Par` value is run:

```scala
scala> def p: Free[Console, Unit] =
| for
|
_ <- printLn("What's your name?")
|
n <- readLn
|
_ <- n match
|
case Some(n) => printLn(s"Hello, $n!")
|
case None => printLn(s"Fine, be that way.")
| yield ()
val p: Free[Console, Unit] =
FlatMap(Suspend(PrintLine(What's your name?)),<function1>)
scala> val q = p.toPar
val q: Par[Unit] = <function1>
```

14 Our `Par` monad from chapter 7 doesn’t handle any exceptions. See the Task.scala file in the answer source code accompanying this chapter for an example of an asynchronous I/O monad with proper exception handling.

[<- Page 0405](./page-0405) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0407 ->](./page-0407)
