---
title: "Page 0354"
outline: false
---

# Page 0354

[<- Page 0353](./page-0353) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0355 ->](./page-0355)

> Part 3: Common structures in functional design / Chapter 12: Applicative and traversable functors / 12.5 The applicative laws

## 325 12.5 The applicative laws

With this new abstraction, we can modify our `Applicative[Validated[E,` `_]]` instance to only require a `Semigroup[E]`:

```scala
given nelSemigroup[A]: Semigroup[NonEmptyList[A]] with
def combine(x: NonEmptyList[A], y: NonEmptyList[A]) =
NonEmptyList(x.head, x.tail ++ (y.head :: y.tail))
given validatedApplicative[E: Semigroup]: Applicative[Validated[E, _]] with
def unit[A](a: => A) = Valid(a)
extension [A](fa: Validated[E, A])
override def map2[B, C](fb: Validated[E, B])(f: (A, B) => C) =
(fa, fb) match
case (Valid(a), Valid(b)) => Valid(f(a, b))
case (Invalid(e1), Invalid(e2)) =>
Invalid(summon[Semigroup[E]].combine(e1, e2))
case (e @ Invalid(_), _) => e
case (_, e @ Invalid(_)) => e
```

Can we do this? Yes! When creating a new abstraction like this, by extraction from an existing abstraction, we should extract the relevant algebraic laws as well. Otherwise, we risk creating abstractions that provide no meaning beyond the existence of an operation (i.e., no ability to build derived operations that are guaranteed to work for any instance). Let’s do this for `Semigroup`. We defined three laws for monoids: associativity, left identity, and right identity. The associativity law can be extracted to the definition of `Semigroup`, which leaves us with the following definitions:

A semigroup for a type `A` has an associative `combine` operation that returns an `A` given two input `A` values.

A monoid is a semigroup with an `empty` element such that `combine(empty,` `a)` `==` `combine(a,` `empty)` `==` `a` for all `a:` `A`.

Why build weaker abstractions out of stronger ones? As we saw with `NonEmptyList`, weaker abstractions often have more instances—instances that cannot be promoted to a stronger abstraction due to the additional constraints demanded by the stronger abstraction. Like the relationship between `Semigroup` and `Monoid`, the `Applicative` abstraction is weaker than `Monad`, providing more instances and hence more ubiquity. `Validated` having an applicative but not a monad is similar to `NonEmptyList` having a semigroup but not a monoid.

### 12.5 The applicative laws

This section walks through the laws for applicative functors.5 You may want to verify that each of these laws is satisfied by some of the data types we’ve been working with so far (an easy one to verify is `Option`).

5 There are various other ways of presenting the laws for `Applicative`. See the chapter notes (https://github.com/fpinscala/fpinscala/wiki) for more information.

[<- Page 0353](./page-0353) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0355 ->](./page-0355)
