---
title: "Page 0293"
outline: false
---

# Page 0293

[<- Page 0292](./page-0292) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0294 ->](./page-0294)

> Part 3: Common structures in functional design / Chapter 10: Monoids / 10.5 Typeclasses

We’ve moved the `Monoid[B]` parameter to its own parameter list and added the `using` keyword. Parameter lists that start with the `using` keyword define *context parameters*.7

Context parameters are not explicitly passed to a function; instead, Scala searches for a *given instance* for each context parameter at the call site of the function. Given instances, also known as givens, are defined with the `given` keyword. Let’s define `intAddition` as a given instance for `Monoid[Int]`:

```scala
given intAddition: Monoid[Int] with
def combine(a1: Int, a2: Int) = a1 + a2
val empty = 0
```

The name for the given instance is optional,8 so we could optionally write this instead:

```scala
given Monoid[Int] with
def combine(a1: Int, a2: Int) = a1 + a2
val empty = 0
```

With either definition, we can use `foldMap`, without explicitly naming the monoid to use:

```scala
val strings = List("abra", "ca", "dabra")
val charCount = foldMap(strings)(_.length)
```

Scala infers that the function passed to `foldMap` returns an `Int` and subsequently searches for a given instance of `Monoid[Int]`. The search succeeds, finding the `intAddition` given instance. Where does Scala search? The full algorithm is complicated, but as a first approximation, it looks

In the current lexical scope, looking for defined given instances or imported given instances or

In the companion objects of the types that appear in the context parameter

The second rule is particularly useful. When searching for a `Monoid[Int]` and failing to find a defined or imported instance in lexical scope, Scala will look in the companion object of both `Monoid` and `Int` for the necessary instance. We can take advantage of this and define all our canonical instances in the `Monoid` companion, but note that we must pick just one instance as the canonical one. Let’s redefine some of the instances we defined earlier:

```scala
object Monoid:
given intAddition: Monoid[Int] with
def combine(a1: Int, a2: Int) = a1 + a2
val empty = 0
```

7 Context parameters are a Scala-3-specific feature. In Scala 2, implicit parameters were used instead. 8 Scala will generate a name for unnamed givens. We’ll generally use named instances throughout the remainder of this book.

[<- Page 0292](./page-0292) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0294 ->](./page-0294)
