---
title: "Page 0468"
outline: false
---

# Page 0468

[<- Page 0467](./page-0467) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0469 ->](./page-0469)

> Part 4: Effects and I/O / Chapter 15: Stream processing and incremental I/O / 15.3 Extensible pulls and streams / 15.3.3 Ensuring resource safety

## 439 15.3 Extensible pulls and streams

Now let’s integrate `Scope` into `Stream` and `Pull`. We’ll start by creating two new cases in the `Pull` enum:

```scala
case OpenScope[+F[_], +O, +R](
source: Pull[F, O, R], finalizer: Option[F[Unit]]
) extends Pull[F, O, R]
case WithScope[+F[_], +O, +R](
source: Pull[F, O, R], scopeId: Id, returnScope: Id
) extends Pull[F, O, R]
```

`OpenScope` references a source pull and finalizer. Upon encountering `OpenScope`, the interpreter calls `open` on the active scope, passing the finalizer. It then interprets the source pull using the newly opened scope as the new active scope. `WithScope` references a source pull, the ID of a scope to use during the interpretation of that source pull, and the ID of a scope to return to when the source pull has terminated. Implied by these new cases, the interpreter (i.e., `fold` and `step`) needs to track the active scope and allow a step to change the current scope. To allow active scope changes, we need to change the result of `step` to include the new active scope. We could change the result type from `Either[R,` `(O,` `Pull[F,` `O,` `R])]` to `(Scope[F],` `Either[R,` `(O,` `Pull[F,` `O,` `R])])`, but that’s a bit overwhelming. Instead, let’s introduce a new type representing the result of a step:

```scala
enum StepResult[F[_], +O, +R]:
case Done(scope: Scope[F], result: R)
case Out(scope: Scope[F], head: O, tail: Pull[F, O, R])
```

Let’s modify `fold` to manage the active scope. We need to construct a root scope and close it after the fold completes, and we need to change the active scope on each `StepResult.Out`:

```scala
def fold[F2[x] >: F[x], R2 >: R, A](init: A)(f: (A, O) => A)(
using F: MonadThrow[F2]
): F2[(R2, A)] =
val scope = Scope.root[F2]
def go(scope: Scope[F2], p: Pull[F2, O, R2], acc: A): F2[(R2, A)] =
p.step(scope).flatMap:
case StepResult.Done(_, r) => F.unit((r, init))
case StepResult.Out(newScope, hd, tl) =>
go(newScope, tl, f(init, hd))
go(scope, this, init).attempt.flatMap(res =>
scope.close.flatMap(_ => res.fold(F.raiseError, F.unit))
)
```

The `step` operation takes the active scope as an argument now, and the result of `step` indicates the next scope to use. Modifying `step` to handle `OpenScope` is fairly straightforward: we delegate to `open` on the active scope, and then we use `WithScope` to evaluate

[<- Page 0467](./page-0467) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0469 ->](./page-0469)
