---
title: "Page 0428"
outline: false
---

# Page 0428

[<- Page 0427](./page-0427) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0429 ->](./page-0429)

> Part 4: Effects and I/O / Chapter 14: Local effects and mutable state / 14.2 A data type to enforce the scoping of side effects / 14.2.2 An algebra of mutable references

## 399 14.2 A data type to enforce the scoping of side effects

some primitives. The language for talking about mutable memory cells should have these primitive commands:

Allocate a new mutable cell

Write to a mutable cell

Read from a mutable cell

The data structure we’ll use for mutable references is just a wrapper around a private `var`:

```scala
final class STRef[S, A] private (private var cell: A):
def read: ST[S,A] = ST(cell)
def write(a: => A): ST[S, Unit] = ST.lift[S, Unit]:
s =>
cell = a
((), s)
object STRef:
def apply[S, A](a: A): ST[S, STRef[S, A]] =
ST(new STRef[S, A](a))
```

The methods on `STRef` to read and write the cell are pure since they just return `ST` actions. Note that the type `S` is not the type of the cell being mutated, and we never actually use the value of type `S`. Nevertheless, to call `apply` and actually run one of these `ST` actions, we do need to have a value of type `S`. That value therefore serves as a kind of token—an authorization to mutate or access the cell—but it serves no other purpose. The only way to construct an instance of `STRef` is by calling the `apply` method on the `STRef` companion object. The `STRef` is constructed with an initial value for the cell of type `A`. However, a naked `STRef` isn’t returned, but rather an `ST[S,` `STRef[S,` `A]]` action that constructs the `STRef` when run and given the token of type `S`. It’s important to note that the `ST` action and the `STRef` it creates are tagged with the same `S` type. At this point, let’s try writing a trivial `ST` program. It’s awkward right now because we have to choose a type `S` arbitrarily. Here we arbitrarily choose `Nothing`:

```scala
for
r1 <- STRef[Nothing, Int](1)
r2 <- STRef[Nothing, Int](1)
x
<- r1.read
y
<- r2.read
_
<- r1.write(y + 1)
_
<- r2.write(x + 1)
a
<- r1.read
b
<- r2.read
yield (a, b)
```

This little program allocates two mutable `Int` cells, swaps their contents, adds one to both, and then reads their new values. But we can’t yet run this program because the underlying function is still encapsulated by the opaqueness of `ST` (and we could never actually pass it a value of the `Nothing` type anyway). Let’s work on that.

[<- Page 0427](./page-0427) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0429 ->](./page-0429)
