---
title: "Page 0039"
outline: false
---

# Page 0039

[<- Page 0038](./page-0038) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0040 ->](./page-0040)

> Part 1: Introduction to functional programming / Chapter 1: What is functional programming? / 1.2 Exactly what is a (pure) function?

### 1.2 Exactly what is a (pure) function?

We discussed earlier that FP refers to programming with pure functions, and a pure function is one that lacks side effects. In our discussion of the coffee shop example, we worked off an informal notion of side effects and purity. Here we’ll formalize this notion to pinpoint more precisely what it means to program functionally. This will also give us additional insight into one of the benefits of functional programming: pure functions are easier to reason about. A function `f` with input type `A` and output type `B` (written in Scala as a single type, `A` `=> B`, which is pronounced *A to B*) is a computation that relates every value `a` of type `A` to exactly one value `b` of type `B` such that `b` is determined solely by the value of `a`. Any changing state of an internal or external process is irrelevant to computing the result `f(a)`. For example, a function `intToString` having type `Int => String` will take every integer to a corresponding string. Furthermore, if it really is a *function*, it will do nothing else. In other words, a function has no observable effect on the execution of the program aside from computing a result given its inputs; we say that it has no side effects. We sometimes qualify such functions as *pure* functions to make this more explicit, but this is somewhat redundant. Unless we state otherwise, we’ll often use *function* to imply there are no side effects.4

You should be familiar with many pure functions already. Consider the addition (`+`) function on integers. It takes two integer values and returns an integer value. For any two given integer values, it will always return the same integer value. Another example is the `length` function of a `String` in Java, Scala, and many other languages in which strings can’t be modified (are immutable). For any given string, the same length is always returned, and nothing else occurs. We can formalize this idea of pure functions using the concept of *referential trans-*parency* (RT). This is a property of *expressions* in general–not just functions. For the purposes of our discussion, consider an expression to be any part of a program that can be evaluated to a result—anything you could type into the Scala interpreter and get an answer. For example, `2 + 3` is an expression that applies the pure function `+` to the values `2` and `3` (which are also expressions). This has no side effect. The evaluation of this expression results in the same value, `5`, every time. In fact, if we saw `2 + 3` in a program, we could simply replace it with the value `5`, and it wouldn’t change a thing about the meaning of our program. This is all it means for an expression to be referentially transparent—in any program, the expression can be replaced by its result without changing the meaning of the program. And we say that a function is *pure* if calling it with RT arguments is also RT. We’ll look at some examples next.

4* Procedure* is often used to refer to some parameterized chunk of code that may have side effects.

[<- Page 0038](./page-0038) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0040 ->](./page-0040)
