---
title: "Page 0026"
outline: false
---

# Page 0026

[<- Page 0025](./page-0025) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0027 ->](./page-0027)

> about this book / liveBook discussion forum

ABOUT THIS BOOK **xxv**

`like` `this` to separate it from ordinary text. Sometimes code is also `in bold` to highlight code that has changed from previous steps in the chapter, such as when a new feature adds to an existing line of code. In many cases, the original source code has been reformatted; we've added line breaks and reworked indentation to accommodate the available page space in the book. In rare cases, even this was not enough, and listings include line continuation markers (➥). Additionally, comments in the source code have often been removed from the listings when the code is described in the text. Code annotations accompany many of the listings, highlighting important concepts. You can get executable snippets of code from the liveBook (online) version of this book at https://livebook.manning.com/book/functional-programming-in-scala-second-edition/welcome. The complete code for the examples in the book is available for download from the Manning website at https://www.manning.com/books/functional-programming-in-scala-second-edition, and from GitHub at https://github.com/fpinscala/fpinscala.

### Setting expectations

Although FP has a profound impact on the way we write software at every level, it takes time to build up to that—it’s an incremental process. Don’t expect to be blown away by how amazing functional programming is in the first chapter. The principles laid out in the beginning are quite subtle and may even seem like they’re just common sense. If you think to yourself, *That’s something I can already do without knowing FP*, then that’s great! That’s exactly the point. Most programmers are already doing FP to some extent without even knowing it. Many things most people consider to be best practices (e.g., making a function have only a single responsibility or data immutable) are implied by accepting the premise of FP. We are simply taking the principles underlying those best practices and carrying them all the way to their logical conclusion. It’s highly likely that in reading this book, you will simultaneously learn both Scala syntax and FP. As a result, at first it may seem to you that the code is very alien, the techniques are unnatural, and the exercises are brain bending. That is perfectly normal—do not be deterred. If you get stuck, look at the hints and answers (https://github.com/fpinscala/fpinscala), or take your questions to GitHub Discussions or the Discord channel (`#fpis-red-book` on Typelevel Discord). Above all, we hope this book will be a fun and rewarding experience for you and FP makes your work easier and more enjoyable, as it has done for us. This book’s purpose, when all is said and done, is to help you be more productive in your work. It should make you feel less like the software you are writing is a collection of dirty hacks and more like you are creating a thing of beauty and utility.

### liveBook discussion forum

Purchase of *Functional Programming in Scala, Second Edition* includes free access to liveBook, Manning’s online reading platform. Using liveBook’s exclusive discussion features, you can attach comments to the book globally or to specific sections or paragraphs. It’s a snap to

[<- Page 0025](./page-0025) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0027 ->](./page-0027)
