---
title: "Page 0100"
outline: false
---

# Page 0100

[<- Page 0099](./page-0099) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0101 ->](./page-0101)

> Part 1: Introduction to functional programming / Chapter 4: Handling errors without exceptions / 4.3 The Option data type

## 71 4.3 The Option data type

*It’s not applicable to polymorphic code.* For some output types, we might not even have a sentinel value of that type even if we wanted to! Consider a function like `max`, which finds the maximum value in a sequence according to a custom comparison function: `def` `max[A](xs:` `Seq[A])(greater:` `(A,A)` `=>` `Boolean):` `A`. If the input is empty, we can’t invent a value of type `A`, nor can `null` be used here, since `null` is only valid for nonprimitive types, and `A` may in fact be a primitive like `Double` or `Int`.

*It demands a special policy or calling convention of callers.* Proper use of the `mean` function would require callers to do something other than call `mean` and make use of the result. Giving functions special policies like this makes it difficult to pass them to higher-order functions, which must treat all arguments uniformly.

The second possibility is forcing the caller to supply an argument that tells us what to do in case we don’t know how to handle the input:

```scala
def mean(xs: Seq[Double], onEmpty: Double): Double =
if xs.isEmpty then onEmpty
else xs.sum / xs.length
```

This makes `mean` into a total function, but it has drawbacks; it requires immediate callers to have direct knowledge of how to handle the undefined case and limits them to returning a `Double`. What if `mean` is called as part of a larger computation and we’d like to abort that computation if `mean` is undefined? Or perhaps we’d like to take some completely different branch in the larger computation in this case. Simply passing an `onEmpty` parameter doesn’t give us this freedom. We need a way to defer the decision of how to handle undefined cases so they can be dealt with at the most appropriate level.

### 4.3 The Option data type

The solution is explicitly representing that a function may not always have an answer in the return type. We can think of this as deferring to the caller for the error-handling strategy. We introduce a new type: `Option`. As mentioned earlier, this type also exists in the Scala standard library, but we’re recreating it here for pedagogical purposes:

```scala
enum Option[+A]:
case Some(get: A)
case None
```

`Option` has two cases: it can be defined, in which case it will be a `Some`, or it can be undefined, in which case it will be `None`. We can use `Option` for our definition of `mean` like so:

```scala
import Option.{Some, None}
def mean(xs: Seq[Double]): Option[Double] =
if xs.isEmpty then None
else Some(xs.sum / xs.length)
```

[<- Page 0099](./page-0099) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0101 ->](./page-0101)
