---
title: "Page 0178"
outline: false
---

# Page 0178

[<- Page 0177](./page-0177) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0179 ->](./page-0179)

> Part 2: Functional design and combinator libraries / Chapter 7: Purely functional parallelism / 7.1 Choosing data types and functions / 7.1.2 Combining parallel computations

## 149 7.1 Choosing data types and functions

evaluating `sum(IndexedSeq(1,2,3,4))`. Take a minute to work through and understand the following (somewhat stylized) program trace.

Listing 7.3 Program trace for `sum`

```scala
sum(IndexedSeq(1,2,3,4))
map2(
sum(IndexedSeq(1,2)),
sum(IndexedSeq(3,4)))(_ + _)
map2(
map2(
sum(IndexedSeq(1)),
sum(IndexedSeq(2)))(_ + _),
sum(IndexedSeq(3,4)))(_ + _)
map2(
map2(
unit(1),
unit(2))(_ + _),
sum(IndexedSeq(3,4)))(_ + _)
map2(
map2(
unit(1),
unit(2))(_ + _),
map2(
sum(IndexedSeq(3)),
sum(IndexedSeq(4)))(_ + _))(_ + _)
...
```

In this trace, to evaluate `sum(x)`, we substitute `x` into the definition of `sum`, as we’ve done in previous chapters. Because `map2` is strict and Scala evaluates arguments left to right, whenever we encounter `map2(sum(x),` `sum(y))(_` `+` `_)`, we must evaluate `sum(x)` and so on recursively. This has the rather unfortunate consequence of requiring us to strictly construct the entire left half of the tree of summations first before moving on to (strictly) constructing the right half. Here `sum(IndexedSeq(1,2))` gets fully expanded before we consider `sum(IndexedSeq(3,4))`. And if `map2` evaluates its arguments in parallel (using whatever resource is being used to implement the parallelism, like a thread pool), that implies the left half of our computation will start executing before we even begin constructing the right half of our computation. What if we keep `map2` strict but don’t have it begin execution immediately? Does this help? If `map2` doesn’t begin evaluation immediately, this implies a `Par` value is merely constructing a description of what needs to be computed in parallel. Nothing actually occurs until we evaluate this description, perhaps using a `get`-like function. The problem is that if we construct our descriptions strictly, they’ll be rather heavyweight objects. Looking back at our trace, our description will have to contain the full tree of operations to be performed:

[<- Page 0177](./page-0177) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0179 ->](./page-0179)
