---
title: "Page 0033"
outline: false
---

# Page 0033

[<- Page 0032](./page-0032) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0034 ->](./page-0034)

> Part 1: Introduction to functional programming / Chapter 1: What is functional programming? / 1.1 Understanding the benefits of functional programming / 1.1.1 A program with side effects

Printing to the console or reading user input

Reading from or writing to a file

Drawing on the screen

We’ll provide a more precise definition of side effects later in this chapter, but consider what programming would be like without the ability to do these things or with significant restrictions on when and how these actions could occur. It may be difficult to imagine. How would it be possible to write useful programs at all? If we can’t reassign variables, how would we write simple programs like loops? What about working with data that changes or handling errors without throwing exceptions? How could we write programs that must perform input/output (I/O), like drawing to the screen or reading from a file? The answer is that functional programming is a restriction on *how* we write programs but not on *what* programs we can express. Over the course of this book, we’ll learn how to express all of our programs without side effects, including programs that perform I/O, handle errors, and modify data. We’ll learn how following the discipline of FP is tremendously beneficial because of the increase in modularity we gain from programming with pure functions. Because of their modularity and lack of side effects, pure functions are easier to test, reuse, parallelize, generalize, and reason about. Furthermore, pure functions are much less prone to bugs. In this chapter, we’ll look at a simple program with side effects and demonstrate some of the benefits of FP by removing these side effects. We’ll also discuss the benefits of FP more generally and define two important concepts: *referential transparency* and the *substitution model*.

### 1.1 Understanding the benefits of functional programming

Let’s look at an example that demonstrates some of the benefits of programming with pure functions. The point here is just to illustrate some basic ideas that we’ll return to throughout this book. This will also be your first exposure to Scala’s syntax. We’ll talk through Scala’s syntax in much greater depth in the next chapter, so don’t worry too much about following every detail. The goal of this chapter is simply to gain a basic idea of what the code is doing.

### 1.1.1 A program with side effects

Suppose we’re implementing a program to handle purchases at a coffee shop. We’ll begin with a Scala 31 program that uses side effects in its implementation (also called an *impure* program). Don’t worry too much about Scala syntax at this point; we’ll take a closer look at that in the next chapter.

1 Throughout this book, we use Scala 3, which is significantly different from Scala 2 in some cases. The concepts explored throughout the book are relevant to both Scala 3 and Scala 2, but porting code snippets to Scala 2 requires some syntactic transformations.

[<- Page 0032](./page-0032) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0034 ->](./page-0034)
