---
title: "Page 0023"
outline: false
---

# Page 0023

[<- Page 0022](./page-0022) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0024 ->](./page-0024)

> about this book / How this book is structured

## about this book

This is not a book about Scala—this book is an introduction to *functional programming*, a radical, principled approach to writing software. We use Scala as the vehicle to get there, but you can apply the lessons herein to programming in any language. As you work through this book, our goal is for you to gain a firm grasp of functional programming concepts, become comfortable writing purely functional programs, and be able to absorb new material on the subject, beyond what we cover here.

### How this book is structured

*Functional Programming in Scala**, Second Edition* is organized into four parts. In part 1, we discuss exactly what functional programming is and introduce some core concepts. The chapters in this first part provide an overview of fundamental techniques, including how to organize small functional programs, define purely functional data structures, handle errors, and deal with state. Building on this foundation, part 2 contains a series of tutorials on *functional* *design*. We work through some examples of practical functional libraries, laying bare the thought process that goes into designing them. While working through the libraries in part 2, it will become clear that these libraries follow certain patterns and contain some duplication. This will highlight the need for new and higher abstractions for writing more generalized libraries, which we introduce in part 3. These are very powerful tools for reasoning about your code; once you master them, you will have the tools to be an extraordinarily productive programmer.

**xxii**

[<- Page 0022](./page-0022) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0024 ->](./page-0024)
