---
title: "Page 0455"
outline: false
---

# Page 0455

[<- Page 0454](./page-0454) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0456 ->](./page-0456)

> Part 4: Effects and I/O / Chapter 15: Stream processing and incremental I/O / 15.3 Extensible pulls and streams

The simple change of adding an `Eval` constructor has had profound consequences for `step`! We’ve picked up a `Monad` constraint for our effect type, and we’ve used monadic recursion instead of regular recursion to sequence computation. As a result, `step` is only stack safe when the effect type has a stack-safe `flatMap` (due to the `other.step.flatMap(…)` call). The signature of `step` has also gotten much more complex. We’ve picked up three type parameters with bounds that indicate they are supertypes of `F`, `O`, and `R`. Without these type parameters, Scala complains that we’re trying to use covariant parameters in invariant positions. Like we’ve done in previous chapters, we can mechanically convert such errors into working definitions through the introduction of type parameters with supertype constraints, though doing so gets very complex. Alternatively, we could define `step` as an extension method, avoiding the need for new type parameters:

```scala
def step(using F: Monad[F]): F[Either[R, (O, Pull[F, O, R])]] =
self match
case Result(r) => F.unit(Left(r))
case Output(o) => F.unit(Right(o, Pull.done))
case Eval(action) => action.map(Left(_))
case FlatMap(source, f) =>
source match
case FlatMap(s2, g) =>
s2.flatMap(x => g(x).flatMap(y => f(y))).step
case other => other.step.flatMap:
case Left(r) => f(r).step
case Right((hd, tl)) => F.unit(Right((hd, tl.flatMap(f))))
```

We’ll use methods throughout this chapter, but if the type constraints become overwhelming, feel free to define operations with extension methods instead. Doing so is often simpler in exchange for the loss of some type inference. The `fold` and `toList` methods need similar treatments, since `fold` calls `step` recursively and `toList` calls `fold`:

```scala
def fold[F2[x] >: F[x], R2 >: R, A](init: A)(f: (A, O) => A)(
using F: Monad[F2]
): F2[(R2, A)] =
step.flatMap:
case Left(r) => F.unit((r, init))
case Right((hd, tl)) => tl.fold(f(init, hd))(f)
def toList[F2[x] >: F[x]: Monad, O2 >: O]: F2[List[O2]] =
fold(List.newBuilder[O])((bldr, o) => bldr += o).map(_(1).result)
```

`fold` can no longer be annotated with the `tailrec` annotation, since it’s now using monadic recursion instead of regular recursion. Again, we rely on `flatMap` of the effect monad to be stack safe.

[<- Page 0454](./page-0454) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0456 ->](./page-0456)
