---
title: "Page 0017"
outline: false
---

# Page 0017

[<- Page 0016](./page-0016) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0018 ->](./page-0018)

> foreword to the second edition

## foreword to the second edition

The eight years since Paul and Rúnar created the first edition of *Functional Program-*ming in Scala* have seen a remarkable transition, both in the Scala ecosystem and the industry at large. In some senses, the way we look at *Functional Programming in Scala*, or *the red book*, as it is often denoted, has mirrored this evolution. Eight years ago, functional programming, and particularly *pure* functional programming, with all its attendant terminology, abstractions, and baggage, was considered a niche discipline at best. Frameworks such as Scalaz were arcana, and their practitioners were wizards advancing a strange religion. Meanwhile, the vast majority of the Scala ecosystem settled into an equilibrium best typified by frameworks like Akka and Spark—weakly higher-order APIs encouraging immutability and careful thought about side effects but with limited abstraction ultimately built on ad hoc (rather than compositional) foundations. Since then, a quiet revolution has taken hold as more and more of these ideas have moved closer to the Scala mainstream. Highly compositional frameworks, like Cats and Fs2, are no longer unwelcome interlopers—their secrets known only to a rare few. Today Scala applications written on top of Http4s are just as common as those written on top of Play. The average Scala application developer may be expected to encounter `Monad` and `Functor` about as often as they encounter `ActorSystem`, and *the red book* is no longer a kitsch tome describing an obscure dialect of a major programming language but *the* standard guide to *advanced Scala*. Functional programming in Scala, both the technique and the book, have entrenched themselves firmly within the landscape of the language and ecosystem.

**xvi**

[<- Page 0016](./page-0016) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0018 ->](./page-0018)
