---
title: "Page 0463"
outline: false
---

# Page 0463

[<- Page 0462](./page-0462) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0464 ->](./page-0464)

> Part 4: Effects and I/O / Chapter 15: Stream processing and incremental I/O / 15.3 Extensible pulls and streams / 15.3.2 Handling errors

error. This is particularly powerful when the stream passed to `onComplete` evaluates an effect. Does `onComplete` let us to safely acquire and release resources, such as file handles? Let’s take a look:

```scala
def acquire(path: String): Task[Source] =
Task(Source.fromFile(path))
def use(source: Source): Stream[Task, Unit] =
Stream.eval(Task(source.getLines))
.flatMap(itr => Stream.fromIterator(itr))
.mapEval(line => Task(println(line)))
def release(source: Source): Task[Unit] =
Task(source.close())
val printLines: Stream[Task, Unit] =
Stream.eval(acquire("path/to/file")).flatMap(resource =>
use(resource).onComplete(Stream.eval(release(resource))))
```

We first evaluate the `acquire` task to open a file, and then we `flatMap` the result, building a stream that uses the opened file and releases it via `onComplete`. We then print each line of the file to the console. If we run this, perhaps with some added logging on resource acquisition and finalization, we’ll see that it does exactly what we want. Unfortunately, this approach has a major limitation; it is not composable. Consider what happens if we refactor things a bit, extracting the printing of each line until after the call to `onComplete`:

```scala
val printLines: Stream[Task, Unit] =
Stream.eval(acquire("path/to/file"))
.flatMap: resource =>
Stream.eval(source => Task(source.getLines))
.flatMap(itr => Stream.fromIterator(itr))
.onComplete(Stream.eval(release(resource)))
.mapEval(line => Task(println(line)))
```

This program should behave the same as the original, and in fact, it does when there are no errors. However, if the final `mapEval` fails with an exception, then the error handler registered by `onComplete` isn’t called, the overall computation fails, and the resource is never finalized. Another problematic case is early termination as a result of only taking some of the elements of the source stream. Imagine if we changed `use` to take the first 10 lines of the file. If we put the `take(10)` in the body of `use`, then the overall stream behaves correctly. However, if we move `take(10)` until after the call to `onComplete`, then the first 10 lines are returned and the resource is never finalized. In both of these cases, we expect a resource to be finalized regardless of what else happens in the stream. Relying solely on `flatMap` and `onComplete` doesn’t give us enough power to provide this guarantee—we’ll return to this guarantee shortly.

[<- Page 0462](./page-0462) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0464 ->](./page-0464)
