---
title: "Page 0250"
outline: false
---

# Page 0250

[<- Page 0249](./page-0249) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0251 ->](./page-0251)

> Part 2: Functional design and combinator libraries / Chapter 9: Parser combinators / 9.2 A possible algebra

## 221 9.2 A possible algebra

We have a strong expectation for the behavior of `map`: it should merely transform the result value if the `Parser` was successful. No additional input characters should be examined by `map`, and a failing parser can’t become a successful one via `map`, or vice versa. In general, we expect `map` to be *structure preserving*, much like we required for `Par` and `Gen`. Let’s formalize this by stipulating the now-familiar law:

```scala
p.map(a => a) == p
```

How should we document this law? We could put it in a documentation comment, but in the preceding chapter, we developed a way of making our laws *executable*. Let’s use that library here.

Listing 9.2 Combining `Parser` with `map`

```scala
import fpinscala.testing.*
trait Parsers[ParseError, Parser[+_]]:
...
object Laws:
def equal[A](p1: Parser[A], p2: Parser[A])(in: Gen[String]): Prop =
Prop.forAll(in)(s => p1.run(s) == p2.run(s))
def mapLaw[A](p: Parser[A])(in: Gen[String]): Prop =
equal(p, p.map(a => a))(in)
```

This will come in handy later when we test that our implementation of `Parsers` behaves as we expect. When we discover more laws later on, you’re encouraged to write them out as actual properties inside the `Laws` object.8

Incidentally, now that we have `map`, we can implement `char` in terms of `string`:

```scala
def char(c: Char): Parser[Char] =
string(c.toString).map(_.charAt(0))
```

Similarly, another combinator, `succeed`, can be defined in terms of `string` and `map`:

```scala
def succeed[A](a: A): Parser[A] =
string("").map(_ => a)
```

This parser always succeeds with the value `a`, regardless of the input string (since `string("")` will always succeed, even if the input is empty). Does this combinator seem familiar to you? We can specify its behavior with a law:

```scala
succeed(a).run(s) == Right(a)
```

8 Again, see the chapter code for more examples. In the interest of keeping this chapter shorter, we won’t give `Prop` implementations of all the laws, but that doesn’t mean you shouldn’t write them yourself!

[<- Page 0249](./page-0249) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0251 ->](./page-0251)
