---
title: "Page 0460"
outline: false
---

# Page 0460

[<- Page 0459](./page-0459) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0461 ->](./page-0461)

> Part 4: Effects and I/O / Chapter 15: Stream processing and incremental I/O / 15.3 Extensible pulls and streams / 15.3.2 Handling errors

## 431 15.3 Extensible pulls and streams

```scala
val dequeue: IO[Message] = ...
val logAll: Stream[IO, Unit] =
Stream.eval(dequeue).repeat.map(format).pipe(log)
```

In this example, the `dequeue` operation blocks until a message is available (perhaps from a distributed message queue). The `logAll` operation repeatedly evaluates `dequeue` and, for each received message, formats messages to a string and logs the result to the console. The overall stream computation has the `Stream[IO,` `Unit]` type. How do we run this stream? Our only eliminators are `fold` and `toList`. Calling `toList` would be a problem, as each log action would output a unit value, which would accumulate in a list builder, eventually using all of our heap. Instead, let’s `fold` and discard each output value. This comes up often when working with effectful streams, so we can create a new eliminator:

```scala
extension [F[_], O](self: Stream[F, O])
def run(using Monad[F]): F[Unit] =
fold(())((_, _) => ()).map(_(1))
val program: IO[Unit] = logAll.run
```

### 15.3.2 Handling errors

Some effect types provide the ability to handle errors that occur during evaluation. The chapter code for chapter 13 defines the `Task[A]` type as an opaque type around an `IO[Try[A]]`. `Task` lets us ignore the presence of potential errors until we want to handle them:

```scala
val a: Task[Int] = Task("asdf".toInt)
val b: Task[Int] = a.map(_ + 1)
val c: Task[Try[Int]] = b.attempt
val d: Try[Int] = c.unsafeRunSync(pool)
```

When the task assigned to `a` is evaluated, the conversion from a string to an integer fails with a `NumberFormatException`. `Task` handles that exception and stores it internally wrapped in a `Failure` (recall that `Failure` is a data constructor of `Try`). In the definition of `b`, the `map` invocation ends up being a no-op. In the definition of `c`, the call to `attempt` exposes the underlying `Try[Int]`. `Task` adds an *error channel* to `IO`—a conduit for passing errors that have occurred through computation, in much the same way as `Try` and `Either` provide for non-effectful computations. We can define a `Monad[Task]` instance that works just like the monad instances for `Try` and `Either`, short circuiting upon encountering a `Failure`. `Task` also provides the `handleErrorWith` combinator, derived from `attempt` and `flatMap`:

```scala
def handleErrorWith(h: Throwable => Task[A]): Task[A] =
attempt.flatMap:
case Failure(t) => h(t)
case Success(a) => Task(a)
```

[<- Page 0459](./page-0459) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0461 ->](./page-0461)
