---
title: "Page 0327"
outline: false
---

# Page 0327

[<- Page 0326](./page-0326) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0328 ->](./page-0328)

> Part 3: Common structures in functional design / Chapter 11: Monads / 11.5 Just what is a monad? / 11.5.2 The State monad and partial type application

```scala
b: String = monad!
scala> a + b
res2: String = Hello, monad!
```

Besides the `Id` wrapper, there’s no difference. So now we have at least a partial answer to the question of what monads mean. We could say monads provide a context for introducing and binding variables and performing variable substitution. Let’s see if we can get the rest of the answer.

### 11.5.2 The State monad and partial type application

Look back at the discussion of the `State` data type in chapter 6. Recall that we implemented some combinators for `State`, including `map` and `flatMap`.

Listing 11.7 Revisiting our `State` data type

```scala
opaque type State[S, +A] = S => (A, S)
object State:
extension [S, A](underlying: State[S, A])
def map[B](f: A => B): State[S, B] =
flatMap(a => unit(f(a)))
def flatMap[B](f: A => State[S, B]): State[S, B] =
s =>
val (a, s1) = underlying(s)
f(a)(s1)
```

It looks like `State` definitely fits the profile for being a monad. However, its type constructor takes two type arguments, and `Monad` requires a type constructor of one argument, so we can’t just say `Monad[State]`. But if we choose some particular `S`, then we have something like `State[S,` `*]`, which is the kind of thing expected by `Monad`. So `State` doesn’t just have one monad instance but a whole family of them—one for each choice of `S`. We’d like to be able to partially apply `State` to where the `S` type argument is fixed to be some concrete type. This is much like how we might partially apply a function, except at the type level. For example, we can create an `IntState` type constructor, which is an alias for `State` with its first type argument fixed to be `Int`:

```scala
type IntState[A] = State[Int, A]
```

And `IntState` is exactly the kind of thing we can build a `Monad` for:

```scala
given intStateMonad: Monad[IntState] with
def unit[A](a: => A): IntState[A] = State(s => (a, s))
def flatMap[A,B](st: IntState[A])(f: A => IntState[B]): IntState[B] =
State.flatMap(st)(f)
```

[<- Page 0326](./page-0326) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0328 ->](./page-0328)
