---
title: "Page 0299"
outline: false
---

# Page 0299

[<- Page 0298](./page-0298) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0300 ->](./page-0300)

> Part 3: Common structures in functional design / Chapter 10: Monoids / 10.8 Conclusion

The associative property enables folding any `Foldable` data type and offers the flexibility of doing so in parallel. Monoids are also compositional, and you can use them to assemble folds in a declarative and reusable way. `Monoid` has been our first purely abstract algebra, defined only in terms of its abstract operations and the laws that govern them. We saw how we can still write useful functions that know nothing about their arguments, except that their type forms a monoid. This more abstract mode of thinking is something we’ll develop further in the rest of part 3. We’ll consider other purely algebraic interfaces and show how they encapsulate common patterns we’ve repeated throughout this book.

### Summary

A monoid is a purely algebraic structure consisting of an associative binary operation and an identity element for that operation.

Associativity lets us move the parentheses around in an expression without changing the result.

Example monoids include string concatenation with the empty string as the identity, integer addition with `0` as the identity, integer multiplication with `1` as the identity, Boolean `and` with `true` as the identity, Boolean `or` with `false` as the identity, and list concatenation with `Nil` as the identity.

Monoids can be modeled as traits with `combine` and `empty` operations.

Monoids allow us to write useful, generic functions for a wide variety of data types.

The `combineAll` function folds the elements of a list into a single value using a monoid.

The `foldMap` function maps each element of a list to a new type and then combines the mapped values with a monoid instance.

 `foldMap` can be implemented with `foldLeft` or `foldRight`, and both `foldLeft` and `foldRight` can be implemented with `foldMap`.

The various monoids encountered in this chapter had nothing in common besides their monoidal structure.

Typeclasses allow us to describe an algebraic structure and provide canonical instances of that structure for various types.

Context parameters are defined by starting a parameter list with the `using` keyword. At the call site, Scala will search for a given instance of each context parameter. Given instances are defined with the `given` keyword.

Context parameters can be passed explicitly with the `using` keyword at the call site.

Scala’s given instances and context parameters allow us to offload type-driven composition to the compiler.

The `summon` method returns the given instance in scope for the supplied type parameter. If no such instance is available, compilation fails.

[<- Page 0298](./page-0298) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0300 ->](./page-0300)
