---
title: "Page 0315"
outline: false
---

# Page 0315

[<- Page 0314](./page-0314) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0316 ->](./page-0316)

> Part 3: Common structures in functional design / Chapter 11: Monads / 11.1 Functors: Generalizing the map function / 11.1.1 Functor laws

For `Functor`, we’ll stipulate the familiar law we first introduced in chapter 7 for our `Par` data type:5

```scala
x.map(a => a) == x
```

In other words, mapping over a structure `x` with the identity function should itself be an identity. This law is quite natural, and we saw later in part 2 that this law was satisfied by the `map` functions of other types besides `Par`. This law (and its corollaries given by parametricity) capture the requirement that `x.map` preserves the structure of `x`. Implementations satisfying this law are restricted from doing strange things like throwing exceptions, removing the first element of a `List`, converting a `Some` to `None`, and so on. Only the elements of the structure are modified by `map`; the shape or structure itself is left intact. Note that this law holds for `List`, `Option`, `Par`, `Gen`, and most other data types that define `map`! To give a concrete example of this preservation of structure, we can consider `distribute` and `codistribute`, defined earlier. Here are their signatures again:

```scala
extension [A, B](fab: F[(A, B)])
def distribute: (F[A], F[B])
extension [A, B](e: Either[F[A], F[B]])
def codistribute: F[Either[A, B]]
```

Since we know nothing about `F` other than that it’s a functor, the law assures us that the returned values will have the same shape as the arguments. If the input to `distribute` is a list of pairs, then the returned pair of lists will be of the same length as the input, and corresponding elements will appear in the same order. This kind of algebraic reasoning can potentially save us a lot of work since we don’t have to write separate tests for these properties. We’ll define one other law for `Functor`, which ensures function composition is preserved:

```scala
x.map(f).map(g) == x.map(f andThen g)
```

This law says that first mapping a function `f` over a structure `x` and mapping another function `g` over the result must be equivalent to mapping the single, composed function `f` `andThen` `g`. Like the identity law, this law also holds for `List`, `Option`, `Par`, `Gen`, and most other data types that define `map`.6

5 This law also comes from the mathematical definition of functor. 6 If we allow impure functions, then Scala’s built-in immutable `Set` is an example of a data type that defines a `map` operation that doesn’t adhere to this law. See https://mng.bz/yaQe for more details.

[<- Page 0314](./page-0314) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0316 ->](./page-0316)
