---
title: "Page 0459"
outline: false
---

# Page 0459

[<- Page 0458](./page-0458) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0460 ->](./page-0460)

> Part 4: Effects and I/O / Chapter 15: Stream processing and incremental I/O / 15.3 Extensible pulls and streams / 15.3.1 Effectful streaming computations

```scala
object Pull:
def unfoldEval[F[_], O, R](
init: R)(f: R => F[Either[R, (O, R)]]): Pull[F, O, R]
```

Finally, let’s update `Pipe` to account for effects:

```scala
type Pipe[F[_], -I, +O] = Stream[F, I] => Stream[F, O]
```

We now have a design choice for the `Pipe` type. We’ve chosen to add a single type parameter `F[_]` to the definition of `Pipe`, which specifies the effect type of both the input stream and the output stream. By using this type parameter in both input and output, we are forced to define the parameter invariantly (try to define it covariantly, and see what the compiler complains about). Yet in doing so, we give up a bit of generality. Instead, we could define `Pipe` like this:

```scala
type Pipe[-F[_], -I, +G[_], +O] = Stream[F, I] => Stream[G, O]
```

While this definition is more expressive, it’s also more complicated. And since `Pipe` is only a type alias, we can always use an explicit function type in the cases where we need the additional expressiveness. Therefore, we’ll stick with the simpler definition.

### 15.3.1 Effectful streaming computations

Now that `Pull`, `Stream`, and `Pipe` support evaluation of arbitrary effects, we can build computations that incrementally acquire data from a source, transform it, and send the results to a sink. If sources are represented by streams and transformations are represented by pipes, how do we represent sinks? It turns out that we don’t need any special support for sinks! In fact, the `mapEval` method from exercise 15.10 provides the basis for effectful sinks. We adopt the convention that a sink is a pipe that changes the output to either `Unit` or `Nothing`—in essence, consuming each output value from the source stream. Consider these example sinks:

```scala
def log[O]: Pipe[IO, O, Unit] = _.mapEval(o => IO(println(o)))
def drain[F[_], O]: Pipe[F, O, Nothing] = _.flatMap(_ => Stream.empty)
```

The `log` sink uses `mapEval` to print each output value of the source to the console. The `drain` sink discards all of the output elements of the source. Putting all the pieces together, we can describe an effectful streaming computation:

```scala
case class Message(id: UUID, timestamp: Instant, ...)
def format(m: Message): String = s"id: $id, timestamp: $timestamp, ..."
```

[<- Page 0458](./page-0458) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0460 ->](./page-0460)
