---
title: "Page 0238"
outline: false
---

# Page 0238

[<- Page 0237](./page-0237) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0239 ->](./page-0239)

> Part 2: Functional design and combinator libraries / Chapter 8: Property-based testing / 8.6 Exercise answers

## 209 8.6 Exercise answers

If the size of the domain is less than the specified number of test cases, we can definitively prove our property. Otherwise, we can only claim we did not find a failing test case, given the test cases we ran. Hence, we’ll slightly change the way we model the result of a property test to provide us this expressiveness:

```scala
enum Status:
case Proven, Unfalsified
enum Result:
case Falsified(failure: FailedCase)
case Passed(status: Status, testCases: TestCases)
```

Property results are now represented as either having been falsified or having passed after a certain number of test cases, along with an indicator showing whether the property was proven or simply not falsified. Returning to `forAll`, we need to decide on a strategy for test cases. One option is first running all the samples in the exhausted list, up to the specified number of test cases. If we reach the end of that list without encountering a `None` or a failure when evaluating a sample, then we’ve proven the property, since we’ve tested against every element of the domain. If instead we encounter a `None`, we can generate the necessary additional test cases randomly using `sample`. There’s a problem with this approach, though. If the `TestCases` argument is smaller than the size of the domain, then we’ll run the same test cases every time we run the property. We can address this by limiting how many elements we use from the exhaustive list before switching to random samples. In the following implementation of `forAll`, we’ve decided to take a third of the test cases from the exhaustive list and the remainder as random samples:

```scala
def forAll[A](a: Gen[A])(f: A => Boolean): Prop =
(max, n, rng) =>
def go(i: Int, j: Int, l: LazyList[Option[A]],
onEnd: Int => Result
): Result =
if i == j then Passed(Unfalsified, i)
else l match
case Some(h) #:: t =>
try
if f(h) then go(i+1, j, t, onEnd)
else Falsified(h.toString)
catch
case e: Exception => Falsified(buildMsg(h, e))
case None #:: _ => Passed(Unfalsified, i)
case _ => onEnd(i)
val numFromExhaustiveList = TestCases.fromInt(n.toInt / 3)
go(0, numFromExhaustiveList, a.exhaustive, i => Passed(Proven, i)) match
case Passed(Unfalsified, _) =>
val rands = randomLazyList(a)(rng).map(Some(_))
go(numFromExhaustiveList, n, rands, i => Passed(Unfalsified, i))
case s => s // If proven or failed, stop immediately
```

[<- Page 0237](./page-0237) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0239 ->](./page-0239)
