---
title: "Page 0024"
outline: false
---

# Page 0024

[<- Page 0023](./page-0023) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0025 ->](./page-0025)

> about this book / How to read this book

ABOUT THIS BOOK **xxiii**

Part 4 then provides the final tools you’ll need for writing real-world applications that perform I/O (e.g., working with databases, files, or video displays) and making use of mutable state, all in a purely functional way. Throughout the book, we rely heavily on programming exercises, carefully sequenced to help you internalize the material. It’s not enough to learn abstract theory when trying to understand functional programming—you have to fire up your text editor and write some code. It’s crucial that you take the theory that you have learned and put it into practice in your work. We’ve also provided online notes for every chapter. Each chapter has a section with discussion related to that chapter, along with links to further material. These chapter notes are meant to be expanded upon by the community of readers and are available as an editable wiki at https://github.com/fpinscala/fpinscala/wiki.

### Audience

This book is intended for readers with at least some programming experience. While writing the book, we had a particular kind of reader in mind: an intermediate-level Java or C programmer who is curious about functional programming. However, we believe this book is well suited for programmers coming from any language, at any level of experience. Prior expertise is not as important as motivation and curiosity. Functional programming is a lot of fun, but it’s a challenging topic. It may be especially challenging for very experienced programmers because it requires such a different way of thinking than they might be used to. No matter how long you have been programming, you must come prepared to be a beginner once again. This book does not require any prior experience with Scala, but we won’t spend a lot of time and space discussing Scala’s syntax and language features. Instead, we will introduce them as we go, with minimal ceremony, mostly as a consequence of covering other material. These introductions to Scala should be enough to get you started with the exercises. If you have further questions about the Scala language, you should supplement your reading with another book on Scala (see https://docs.scala-lang.org/books.html) or look up specific questions in the Scala language documentation (http://scala-lang.org/documentation/).

### How to read this book

Although the book can be read sequentially, the sequencing of the four parts is designed such that you can comfortably break between them, apply what you have learned to your own work, and then come back later for the next part. For example, the material in part 4 will make the most sense after you have a strong familiarity with the functional style of programming developed in parts 1, 2, and 3. After part 3, it may be a good idea to take a break and try getting more practice writing functional programs beyond the exercises we work on in the chapters. Of course, this is ultimately up to you.

[<- Page 0023](./page-0023) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0025 ->](./page-0025)
