---
title: "Page 0019"
outline: false
---

# Page 0019

[<- Page 0018](./page-0018) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0020 ->](./page-0020)

> preface to the second edition

## preface to the second edition

When I was asked to write the second edition of *Functional Programming in Scala*, I was both excited and apprehensive. I was excited because the first edition had a profound impact on my journey as a functional programmer. It taught me a new way to think about programming, more so than any other programming book I had ever encountered. And I was apprehensive for the same reason—would I be able to do justice to the first edition? The first edition was published in 2014 and quickly became regarded as a classic text in functional programming. It’s been used by university courses and study groups, hobbyists, and the world’s largest companies, and it’s been translated into multiple languages. The first edition also had a reputation for being very challenging, with many readers getting stuck on some of the exercises. A lot has changed in Scala since 2014. At the time of publication, Scala 2.10 had been recently released and the Scala FP ecosystem was in its infancy. Major open source projects like doobie (http://github.com/tpolecat/doobie) and http4s (http://http4s.org) were just getting started; the Cats (http://typelevel.org/cats/) library didn’t yet exist; and FS2 (https://github.com/typelevel/fs2), which grew out of the code presented in chapter 15, had just been published. Interoperability between libraries was cumbersome, and the Scala language had some key limitations that made FP less accessible than it could have been. The second edition of *Functional Programming in Scala* does not stray far from the first. I cover the same main topics and in the same style, avoiding teaching any specific library and instead focusing on teaching the underlying concepts powering libraries

**xviii**

[<- Page 0018](./page-0018) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0020 ->](./page-0020)
