---
title: "Page 0028"
outline: false
---

# Page 0028

[<- Page 0027](./page-0027) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0029 ->](./page-0029)

> about the authors

## about the authors

**M****ICHAEL**** P****ILQUIST** started programming on an IBM AT using the BASICA programming language. In college, he was introduced to Standard ML but entered industry and focused on C++, Java, and C#. It would be nearly a decade before he returned to functional programming. Michael is an Engineering Fellow at Comcast, where he is responsible for the end-to-end architecture of video distribution systems. Michael introduced Scala at Comcast, gradually transitioning organizations from enterprise Java with Spring to functional programming flavored Scala. The adoption of functional programming in these organizations directly led to more resilient systems that were easier to evolve to the changing needs of the business. Michael is the author of many functional open source libraries including FS2, Scodec, and Simulacrum, and he’s a co-maintainer of many other libraries including Cats, Cats Effect, and Skunk. **R****ÚNAR**** B****JARNASON** is a renowned software developer and functional programming expert with a passion for the Scala programming language. Alongside Paul Chiusano, Rúnar co-authored the influential book *Functional Programming in Scala*, which is widely considered a seminal text for learning functional programming concepts in Scala. In addition to his work in Scala, Rúnar has contributed to the development of the Unison programming language, a modern, statically-typed purely functional language designed to simplify building and maintaining large distributed systems.

**xxvii**

[<- Page 0027](./page-0027) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0029 ->](./page-0029)
