---
title: "Page 0442"
outline: false
---

# Page 0442

[<- Page 0441](./page-0441) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0443 ->](./page-0443)

> Part 4: Effects and I/O / Chapter 15: Stream processing and incremental I/O / 15.1 Problems with imperative I/O: An example

## 413 15.1 Problems with imperative I/O: An example

```scala
lines
.filter(!_.trim.isEmpty)
.take(40000)
.map(_.head)
.indexOfSlice("abracadabra".toList)
```

We want to write something like the preceding when reading from an actual file. The problem is that we don’t have a `LazyList[String]`; we have a file from which we can read. We could cheat by writing a function named `lines` that returns an `IO[LazyList[String]]`:

```scala
def lines(filename: String): IO[LazyList[String]] = IO:
val src = io.Source.fromFile(filename)
src.getLines().to(LazyList).append {
src.close
LazyList.empty
}
```

This is called *lazy I/O*. We’re cheating because the `LazyList[String]` inside the `IO` monad isn’t actually a pure value. As elements of the stream are forced, it’ll execute side effects of reading from the file, and only if we examine the entire stream and reach its end will we close the file. Although lazy I/O is appealing in that it lets us recover the compositional style to some extent, it’s problematic for several reasons:

*It isn’t resource-safe.* The resource (in this case, a file) will be released only if we traverse to the end of the stream. But we’ll frequently want to terminate traversal early (here, `exists` will stop traversing the `LazyList` as soon as it finds a match), and we certainly don’t want to leak resources every time we do this.

*Nothing stops us from traversing that same *`LazyList`* again after the file has been closed.* This will result in one of two things, depending on whether the `LazyList` *memoizes* (caches) its elements once they’re forced. If they’re memoized, we’ll see excessive memory usage, since all of the elements will be retained in memory. If they’re not memoized, traversing the stream again will cause a read from a closed file handle.

*Since forcing elements of the stream has I/O side effects, two threads traversing a *`Lazy-` `List`* at the same time can result in unpredictable behavior.*

*In more realistic scenarios, we won’t necessarily have full knowledge of what’s happening* *with the *`LazyList[String]`*.* It could be passed to some function we don’t control, which might store it in a data structure for a long period of time before ever examining it. Proper usage now requires some out-of-band knowledge: we can’t just manipulate this `LazyList[String]` like a typical pure value—we have to know something about its origin. This is bad for composition, where we shouldn’t have to know anything about a value other than its type.

[<- Page 0441](./page-0441) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0443 ->](./page-0443)
