---
title: "Page 0016"
outline: false
---

# Page 0016

[<- Page 0015](./page-0015) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0017 ->](./page-0017)

> foreword to the first edition

FOREWORD TO THE FIRST EDITION **xv**

imperative background to keep their style and not make the necessary effort to adapt to the functional mindset. In fact, it’s quite possible to write Scala as if it were Java without the semicolons. So to properly learn functional programming in Scala, should one make a detour via a pure functional language, such as Haskell? Any argument in favor of this approach has been severely weakened by the appearance of *Functional Programming in* *Scala*. What Paul and Rúnar do, put simply, is treat Scala as a pure functional programming language. Mutable variables, exceptions, classical input/output, and all other traces of impurity are eliminated. If you wonder how one can write useful programs without any of these conveniences, you need to read the book. Building up from first principles and extending all the way to incremental input and output, they demonstrate that, indeed, one can express every concept using only pure functions. And they show that it is not only possible but that it also leads to beautiful code and deep insights into the nature of computation. The book is challenging, both because it demands attention to detail and because it might challenge the way you think about programming. By reading the book and completing the recommended exercises, you will develop a better appreciation of what pure functional programming is, what it can express, and what its benefits are. What I particularly liked about the book is that it is self-contained. It starts with the simplest possible expressions, and every abstraction is explained in detail before further abstractions are built on them in turn. In a sense, the book develops an alternative Scala universe, where mutable state does not exist and all functions are pure. Commonly used Scala libraries tend to deviate a bit from this ideal; often they are based on a partly imperative implementation with a (mostly) functional interface. That Scala allows the encapsulation of mutable state in a functional interface is, in my opinion, one of its strengths. But it is a capability that is also often misused. If you find yourself using it too often, *Functional Programming in Scala* is a powerful antidote.

—MARTIN ODERSKY, CREATOR OF SCALA

[<- Page 0015](./page-0015) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0017 ->](./page-0017)
