---
title: "Page 0444"
outline: false
---

# Page 0444

[<- Page 0443](./page-0443) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0445 ->](./page-0445)

> Part 4: Effects and I/O / Chapter 15: Stream processing and incremental I/O / 15.2 Simple stream transformations / 15.2.1 Creating pulls

## 415 15.2 Simple stream transformations

A `Pull[O,` `R]` outputs any number of values of type `O` and then terminates with a single value of type `R`. A pull can be incrementally evaluated via `step`, either outputting a final value of `R` or outputting a value `O` and a new pull representing the remainder of the input stream. With this model, we can construct arbitrarily complex pulls from a variety of sources of data by sequencing `Pull.Output` calls using `flatMap`. When we want to run the final stream transformation, we can use `fold`, which repeatedly steps the pull until termination. Of particular note is the `flatMap` operation. Rather than converting each output value to a new pull and concatenating all of the results, `flatMap` operates on the final result value of type `R`. This means we can concatenate the values of two pulls using the derived `>>` method. We’ll look at this in a moment. The `Pull` type is covariant in both the output type and the result type. This covariance lets us define `Result[+R]` as a `Pull[Nothing,` `R]` and `Output[+O]` as a `Pull[O,` `Unit]`. These subtyping relationships are similar to how `None` is an `Option[Nothing]` and `Nil` is a `List[Nothing]`. Thus, we get an API that works better with type inference. We’ll take a deeper look at type inference later.

### 15.2.1 Creating pulls

One of the simplest pulls we can create is one that outputs no values and terminates with a unit:

```scala
val done: Pull[Nothing, Unit] = Result(())
```

We can construct pulls that output single values and concatenate them:

```scala
scala> val p = Pull.Output(1) >> Pull.Output(2)
val p: Pull[Int, Unit] = FlatMap(Output(1),...)
scala> val q = p.toList
val q: List[Int] = List(1, 2)
```

The `p1` `>>` `p2` operation is shorthand for writing `p1.flatMap(_` `=>` `p2)`. We can use recursion with `done` and `>>` to construct pulls from lists and lazy lists:

```scala
def fromList[O](os: List[O]): Pull[O, Unit] =
os match
case Nil => done
case hd :: tl => Output(hd) >> fromList(tl)
def fromLazyList[O](os: LazyList[O]): Pull[O, Unit] =
os match
case LazyList() => done
case hd #:: tl => Output(hd) >> fromLazyList(tl)
```

In both `fromList` and `fromLazyList`, we construct a pull using recursion. We convert each input element into an `Output` pull and then use `>>` to lazily recurse. This is stack safe due to `>>` taking its only argument lazily. This is similar to how we used lazy

[<- Page 0443](./page-0443) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0445 ->](./page-0445)
