---
title: "Page 0157"
outline: false
---

# Page 0157

[<- Page 0156](./page-0156) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0158 ->](./page-0158)

> Part 1: Introduction to functional programming / Chapter 6: Purely functional state / 6.5 A general state action data type

### 6.5 A general state action data type

The functions we’ve just written—`unit`, `map`, `map2`, `flatMap`, and `sequence`—aren’t specific to random number generation at all. They’re general-purpose functions for working with state actions and don’t care about the type of the state. Note that, for instance, `map` doesn’t care that it’s dealing with `RNG` state actions, and we can give it a more general signature:

```scala
def map[S, A, B](action: S => (A, S))(f: A => B): S => (B, S)
```

Changing this signature doesn’t require modifying the implementation of `map`. The more general function was there all along; we just didn’t see it. We should then come up with a more general type than `Rand` for handling any type of state:

```scala
type State[S, +A] = S => (A, S)
```

Here `State` is short for *computation that carries some state along*, *state action*, *state transi-*tion*, or even *statement* (see the next section). We might want to write it as its own type instead of using an alias, allowing us to define methods without worrying about conflicting with the methods on the function type. We could do so by simply wrapping the underlying function value like this:

```scala
case class State[S, +A](run: S => (A, S))
```

Alternatively, we can use a feature of the Scala 3 type system called *opaque types*. An opaque type behaves like a type alias inside the defining scope. Outside of the defining scope, though, the opaque type is unrelated to the representation type. Here *defin-*ing scope* refers to the object containing the definition or, if the definition is top level, the package containing it. Here’s what `State` could look like using an opaque type:

```scala
opaque type State[S, +A] = S => (A, S)
object State:
extension [S, A](underlying: State[S, A])
def run(s: S): (A, S) = underlying(s)
def apply[S, A](f: S => (A, S)): State[S, A] = f
```

Besides the opaque type definition, we provide an extension method `run`, allowing the invocation of the underlying function as well as an `apply` method on the companion, which allows a `State` value to be constructed from a function. In both cases, the fact that `State[S,` `A]` is equivalent to `S` `=>` `(A,` `S)` is known, which makes these two operations simple and seemingly redundant. However, outside the defining scope—in a different package, for example—the equivalence of `State[S,` `A]` and `S` `=>` `(A,` `S)` is not known, and hence we need such conversions. See the official documentation for more details on opaque type (https://mng.bz/gRR8) and extension methods (https://mng.bz/5mm7).

[<- Page 0156](./page-0156) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0158 ->](./page-0158)
