---
title: "Page 0043"
outline: false
---

# Page 0043

[<- Page 0042](./page-0042) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0044 ->](./page-0044)

> Part 1: Introduction to functional programming / Chapter 1: What is functional programming? / 1.4 Conclusion

become clearer over the course of this book, we illustrated some of the benefits of FP using a simple example. We also discussed referential transparency and the substitution model and talked about how FP enables simpler reasoning about programs and greater modularity. In this book, you’ll learn the concepts and principles of FP as they apply to every level of programming, starting from the simplest of tasks and building on that foundation. In subsequent chapters, we’ll cover some of the fundamentals: How do we write loops in FP? How do we implement data structures? How do we deal with errors and exceptions? We need to learn how to do these things and get comfortable with the low-level idioms of FP. We’ll build on this understanding when we explore functional design techniques in parts 2, 3, and 4.

### Summary

Functional programming is the construction of programs using only pure functions—functions that do not have side effects.

A side effect is something a function does aside from simply returning a result.

Examples of side effects include modifying a field on an object, throwing an exception, and accessing the network or file system.

Functional programming constrains the way we write programs but does not limit our expressive power.

Side effects limit our ability to understand, compose, test, and refactor parts of our programs.

Moving side effects to the outer edges of our program results in a pure core and thin outer layer, which handles effects and results in better testability.

Referential transparency defines whether an expression is pure or contains side effects.

The substitution model provides a way to test whether an expression is referentially transparent.

Functional programming enables local reasoning and allows the embedding of smaller programs within larger programs.

[<- Page 0042](./page-0042) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0044 ->](./page-0044)
