---
title: "Page 0211"
outline: false
---

# Page 0211

[<- Page 0210](./page-0210) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0212 ->](./page-0212)

> Part 2: Functional design and combinator libraries / Chapter 8: Property-based testing / 8.1 A brief tour of property-based testing / 8.1.1 Choosing data types and functions

Property-based testing libraries often come equipped with other useful features. We’ll talk more about some of these features later, but the following should provide an idea of what’s possible:

*Test case minimization*—In the event of a failing test, the framework tries smaller sizes until it finds the smallest test case that also fails, which is more illuminating for debugging purposes. For instance, if a property fails for a list of size 10, then the framework tries smaller lists and reports the smallest list that fails the test.

*Exhaustive test case generation*—We call the set of values that could be produced by some `Gen[A]` the *domain*.2 When the domain is small enough (for instance, if it’s all even integers less than 100), we may exhaustively test all its values, rather than generate sample values. If the property holds for all values in a domain, then we have an actual proof, rather than just the absence of evidence to the contrary.

ScalaCheck is just one property-based testing library, and we’ll derive our own library in this chapter, starting from scratch. Like in chapter 7, this is mostly for pedagogical purposes but also partly because we should consider no library to be the final word on any subject. There’s certainly nothing wrong with using an existing library, like Scala- Check, and existing libraries can be a good source of ideas. But even if you decide you like the existing library’s solution, spending an hour or two playing with designs and writing down some type signatures is a great way to learn more about the domain and understand the design trade-offs.

### 8.1.1 Choosing data types and functions

This section will be another messy and iterative process of discovering data types and functions for our library. This time around, we’re designing a library for propertybased testing. As before, this is a chance to peer over the shoulder of someone working through possible designs. The particular path we take and the library we arrive at aren’t necessarily the same as what you would come up with on your own. If property-based testing is unfamiliar to you, even better; this is a chance to explore a new domain and its design space and make your own discoveries about it. If at any point you’re feeling inspired or have ideas of your own about how to design a library like this, don’t wait for an exercise to prompt you; put the book down, and go off to play with your ideas. You can always come back to the chapter if you run out of ideas or get stuck.

2 This is the same usage of *domain* as the domain of a function (http://mng.bz/ZP8q); generators describe possible inputs to functions we’d like to test. Note that we’ll also still sometimes use *domain* in the more colloquial sense to refer to a subject or area of interest—for example, *the domain of functional parallelism* or *the* *error-handling domain*.

[<- Page 0210](./page-0210) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0212 ->](./page-0212)
