---
title: "Page 0392"
outline: false
---

# Page 0392

[<- Page 0391](./page-0391) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0393 ->](./page-0393)

> Part 4: Effects and I/O / Chapter 13: External effects and I/O / 13.3 Avoiding the StackOverflowError / 13.3.1 Reifying control flow as data constructors

## 363 13.3 Avoiding the StackOverflowError

Our naive `IO` monad also has a few problems:

’éĪ*Many *`IO`* programs will overflow the runtime call stack and throw a *`StackOverflow Error`*.* If you havenŌĆÖt encountered this problem yet in your own experimenting, you will certainly run into it if you write larger programs using our current `IO` type. For example, if you keep typing numbers into the `factorialREPL` program from earlier, it eventually overflows the stack.

’éĪ*A value of type *`IO[A]`* is completely opaque.* ItŌĆÖs really just a lazy identityŌĆöa function that takes no arguments. When we call `unsafeRun`, we hope it will eventually produce a value of type `A`, but thereŌĆÖs no way for us to inspect such a program and see what it might do. It might hang forever and do nothing, or it might eventually do something productiveŌĆöthereŌĆÖs no way to tell. We could say itŌĆÖs too general, and as a result, thereŌĆÖs little reasoning we can do with `IO` values. We can compose them with the monadic combinators, or we can run them, but thatŌĆÖs all we can do.

’éĪ*Our simple *`IO`* type has nothing at all to say about concurrency or asynchronous opera-*tions.* The primitives we have so far only allow us to sequence opaque blocking `IO` actions one after another. Many I/O libraries, such as the java.nio package that comes with the standard libraries, allow nonblocking and asynchronous I/O. Our `IO` type is incapable of making use of such operations. WeŌĆÖll rectify that by the end of this chapter when we develop a more practical `IO` monad. LetŌĆÖs start by solving the first problem (overflowing the call stack), since it will inform our solution for the other two.

### 13.3 Avoiding the StackOverflowError

To better understand the `StackOverflowError`, consider this very simple program that demonstrates the problem:

```scala
val p = PrintLine("Still going...").forever
```

If we evaluate `p.unsafeRun`, it will crash with a `StackOverflowError` after printing a few thousand lines. If you look at the stack trace, youŌĆÖll see that `unsafeRun` is calling itself over and over. The problem is in the definition of `flatMap`:

```scala
def flatMap[B](f: A => IO[B]): IO[B] = new:
def unsafeRun = f(self.unsafeRun).unsafeRun
```

This method creates a new `IO` object whose `unsafeRun` definition calls `unsafeRun` again before calling `f`. This will keep building up nested `unsafeRun` calls on the stack and eventually overflow it. What can we do about this?

### 13.3.1 Reifying control flow as data constructors

The answer is surprisingly simple. Instead of letting program control just flow through with function calls, we explicitly bake the control flow we want to support into our

[<- Page 0391](./page-0391) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0393 ->](./page-0393)
