---
title: "Page 0301"
outline: false
---

# Page 0301

[<- Page 0300](./page-0300) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0302 ->](./page-0302)

> Part 3: Common structures in functional design / Chapter 10: Monoids / 10.9 Exercise answers

’éĪWhen both inputs are `None`, the only thing we can do is return a `None` (since returning a `Some` would require the ability to create a value of `A`).

’éĪWhen one input is `None` and the other is `Some`, we have a choice: we could return either the `None` or `Some`. However, if we returned `None`, our identity law would failŌĆöfor example, `combine(empty,` `Some(x))` would return `None`, but our law requires it to return `Some(x)`. Hence, we donŌĆÖt really have a choice hereŌĆö we must return the `Some` value.

’éĪWhen both inputs are `Some`, we have another choice: we can return either value. Notably, though, we cannot combine the values into a new value, as we have no information about `A`, which allows combining values. Either choice passes our monoid laws.

This gives us the following implementation:

```scala
def firstOptionMonoid[A]: Monoid[Option[A]] = new:
def combine(x: Option[A], y: Option[A]) = x orElse y
val empty = None
```

We could define a different monoid value that returns `y` first and then `x`:

```scala
def lastOptionMonoid[A]: Monoid[Option[A]] = new:
def combine(x: Option[A], y: Option[A]) = y orElse x
val empty = None
```

We can generalize this notion of changing the order of `x` and `y` and generate a combinator that returns the dual monoid for any input monoid:

```scala
def dual[A](m: Monoid[A]): Monoid[A] = new:
def combine(x: A, y: A) = m.combine(y, x)
val empty = m.empty
```

With `dual` we can rewrite `lastOptionMonoid` in terms of `firstOptionMonoid`:

```scala
def lastOptionMonoid[A]: Monoid[Option[A]] = dual(firstOptionMonoid)
```

Consider the result of computing the dual monoid for various monoids weŌĆÖve looked at so far. The dual of the integer addition monoid turns out to be equal to the integer addition monoidŌĆöbecause the order in which we sum integers doesnŌĆÖt matter, we always get the same result. We say an operation is *commutative* if the order doesnŌĆÖt matter (e.g., if `combine(x,` `y)` `==` `combine(y,` `x)`). The integer multiplication and Boolean monoids are also commutative. However, the string concatenation and list monoids are not commutative, and hence their dual monoids are distinct. Returning to the `Monoid[Option[A]]`, instead of letting the constraints force us into the monoid definitions we came up with, what if we changed the constraints? We still want a lawful monoid, so we canŌĆÖt change the associativity or identity laws, but we could ask for more informationŌĆöin particular, we could write a `combine` operation

[<- Page 0300](./page-0300) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0302 ->](./page-0302)
