---
title: "Page 0125"
outline: false
---

# Page 0125

[<- Page 0124](./page-0124) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0126 ->](./page-0126)

> Part 1: Introduction to functional programming / Chapter 5: Strictness and laziness / 5.1 Strict and nonstrict functions

in Scala will be strict (and almost all the functions we’ve defined so far have been strict). As an example, consider the following function:

```scala
def square(x: Double): Double = x * x
```

When you invoke `square(41.0` `+` `1.0)`, the function `square` will receive the evaluated value of `42.0` because it’s strict. If you invoke `square(sys.error("failure"))`, you’ll get an exception before `square` has a chance to do anything since the `sys.error` `("failure")` expression will be evaluated before entering the body of `square`. Although we haven’t yet learned the syntax for indicating nonstrictness in Scala (though we saw a preview with `getOrElse` and `orElse` last chapter), you’re almost certainly familiar with the concept. For example, the short-circuiting Boolean functions `&&` and `||` found in many programming languages, including Scala, are nonstrict. You may be used to thinking of `&&` and `||` as built-in syntax—part of the language—but you can also think of them as functions that may choose not to evaluate their arguments. The function `&&` takes two `Boolean` arguments but only evaluates the second argument if the first is `true`:

```scala
scala> false && { println("!!"); true } // does not print anything
res0: Boolean = false
```

And `||` only evaluates its second argument if the first is `false`:

```scala
scala> true || { println("!!"); false } // doesn't print anything either
res1: Boolean = true
```

Another example of nonstrictness is the `if` control construct in Scala:

```scala
val result = if input.isEmpty then sys.error("empty input") else input
```

Even though `if` is a built-in language construct in Scala, it can be thought of as a function accepting three parameters: a condition of type `Boolean`, an expression of some type `A` to return in case the condition is `true`, and another expression of the same type `A` to return if the condition is `false`. This `if` function would be nonstrict since it won’t evaluate all of its arguments. To be more precise, we’d say the `if` function is strict in its condition parameter—since it will always evaluate the condition to determine which branch to take—and nonstrict in the two branches for the `true` and `false` cases— since it will only evaluate one or the other based on the condition. In Scala, we can write nonstrict functions by accepting some of our arguments unevaluated. We’ll show how this is done explicitly just to illustrate what’s happening, and then we’ll show some nicer syntax for it that’s built into Scala. Here’s a nonstrict `if` function:

```scala
def if2[A](cond: Boolean, onTrue: () => A, onFalse: () => A): A =
if cond then onTrue() else onFalse()
```

[<- Page 0124](./page-0124) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0126 ->](./page-0126)
