---
title: "Page 0256"
outline: false
---

# Page 0256

[<- Page 0255](./page-0255) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0257 ->](./page-0257)

> Part 2: Functional design and combinator libraries / Chapter 9: Parser combinators / 9.4 Writing a JSON parser / 9.4.2 A JSON parser

## 227 9.4 Writing a JSON parser

to any particular implementation, and part of our goal here is getting you comfortable with this style of working. After this section, we’ll return to the question of adding better error reporting to our parsing API. We can do this without disturbing the overall structure of the API or changing our JSON parser very much. We’ll also come up with a concrete, runnable representation of our `Parser` type. Importantly, the JSON parser we’ll implement in the next section will be completely independent of that representation.

### 9.4.1 The JSON format

If you aren’t already familiar with all the details of the JSON format, you may want to read the grammar specification (http://json.org). Here’s an example JSON document:

```scala
{
"Company name" : "Microsoft Corporation",
"Ticker"
: "MSFT",
"Active"
: true,
"Price"
: 30.66,
"Shares outstanding" : 8.38e9,
"Related companies" :
[ "HPQ", "IBM", "YHOO", "DELL", "GOOG" ]
}
```

A *value* in JSON can be one of several types. An *object* in JSON is a comma-separated sequence of key-value pairs wrapped in curly braces (`{}`). The keys must be strings like `"Ticker"` or `"Price"`, and the values can be either another object; an *array*, like `["HPQ",` `"IBM"` `…` `]`, that contains further values; or a *literal*, like `"MSFT",` `true,` `null,` or `30.66`. We’ll write a rather dumb parser that simply parses a syntax tree from the document, without doing any further processing.11 We’ll need a representation for a parsed JSON document. Let’s introduce a data type for this:

```scala
enum JSON:
case JNull
case JNumber(get: Double)
case JString(get: String)
case JBool(get: Boolean)
case JArray(get: IndexedSeq[JSON])
case JObject(get: Map[String, JSON])
```

### 9.4.2 A JSON parser

Recall that we’ve built up the following set of primitives:

 `string(s)`—Recognizes and returns a single `String`

 `regex(s)`—Recognizes a regular expression `s`

 `p.slice`—Returns the portion of input inspected by `p` if successful

11See the chapter notes (https://github.com/fpinscala/fpinscala/wiki) for discussion of alternate approaches.

[<- Page 0255](./page-0255) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0257 ->](./page-0257)
