---
title: "Page 0465"
outline: false
---

# Page 0465

[<- Page 0464](./page-0464) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0466 ->](./page-0466)

> Part 4: Effects and I/O / Chapter 15: Stream processing and incremental I/O / 15.3 Extensible pulls and streams / 15.3.3 Ensuring resource safety

To summarize, a stream `s` may terminate due to

Producer exhaustion when the source has no further values to output

Early termination when the remainder of a source is discarded

Abnormal termination when an exception is thrown

No matter the cause, we want to close the underlying resource(s) in each case. Now that we have our guidelines, how do we actually implement this? To handle early termination, we need a way of running cleanup actions of a source stream even when it is discarded. This suggests a design where the cleanup actions of acquired resources are tracked by the interpreter instead of being primitive actions in the stream composed with `flatMap` and `handleErrorWith`. Let’s introduce a new stream constructor that captures this pattern:

```scala
def resource[F[_], R](acquire: F[R])(release: R => F[Unit]): Stream[F, R]
```

The `resource` operation creates a single element stream from `acquire` and guarantees that the `release` action is evaluated according to the guidelines we’ve established. How can we implement `resource`? In the rest of this section, we’ll walk through one approach, but don’t worry about all the details of the implementation. The important concept here is how `resource` behaves, not how it’s implemented. To start, we’ll introduce the notion of a *scope* in which stream interpretation occurs. A scope is either *open* or *closed*. An *open scope* has an associated cleanup action, which we’ll refer to as a *finalizer*. An open scope may also have any number of subscopes. We can register a new finalizer on a scope by opening a subscope that references that finalizer. An open scope can be closed, which has the effect of first closing all subscopes and then running the finalizer. Since we’re representing finalizers as values of type `F[Unit]`, the `Scope` type must be parameterized by our effect type. To implement the various state transitions, like opening a subscope and closing a scope tree, we need the ability to manipulate state in the effect `F`. We can do this using a new type—`Ref`:

```scala
final class Ref[F[_], A] private (
underlying: AtomicReference[A],
delay: [A] => (() => A) => F[A]
):
```

> Lifts an arbitrary thunk to an effectful action

```scala
def get: F[A] = delay(() => underlying.get)
def set(a: A): F[Unit] = delay(() => underlying.set(a))
def modify[B](f: A => (A, B)): F[B] = delay: () =>
@annotation.tailrec
def loop(): B =
val oldA = underlying.get
val (newA, result) = f(oldA)
if underlying.compareAndSet(oldA, newA) then result else loop()
loop()
```

[<- Page 0464](./page-0464) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0466 ->](./page-0466)
