---
title: "Page 0395"
outline: false
---

# Page 0395

[<- Page 0394](./page-0394) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0396 ->](./page-0396)

> Part 4: Effects and I/O / Chapter 13: External effects and I/O / 13.3 Avoiding the StackOverflowError / 13.3.2 Trampolining: A general solution to stack overflow

```scala
FlatMap(a1, a1 =>
FlatMap(a2, a2 =>
FlatMap(a3, a3 =>
...
FlatMap(aN, aN => Return(aN)))))
```

If we now call `unsafeRun` on our example program `p`, it’ll continue running indefinitely without a stack overflow, which is what we want. Our `unsafeRun` function won’t overflow the stack, even for infinitely recursive `IO` programs. What have we done here? When a program running on the JVM makes a function call, it’ll push a frame onto the call stack to remember where to return after the call has finished, so the execution can continue. We’ve made this program control explicit in our `IO` data type. When `unsafeRun` interprets an `IO` program, it’ll determine whether the program is requesting to execute some effect with a `Suspend(s)` or it wants to call a subroutine with `FlatMap(x,` `f)`. Instead of the program making use of the call stack, `unsafeRun` will call `x()` and then continue by calling `f` on the result of that, and `f` will immediately return either a `Suspend`, `FlatMap`, or `Return`, transferring control to `unsafeRun` again. Our `IO` program is therefore a kind of *coroutine* that executes cooperatively with `unsafeRun`. It continually makes either `Suspend` or `FlatMap` requests, and every time it does so, it suspends its own execution and returns control to `unsafeRun`. And it’s actually `unsafeRun` that drives the execution of the program forward, one such suspension at a time. A function like `unsafeRun` is sometimes called a *trampoline*, and the overall technique of returning control to a single loop to eliminate the stack is called *trampolining*.

### 13.3.2 Trampolining: A general solution to stack overflow

There is no requirement for the `resume` functions in our `IO` monad to perform side effects. The `IO` type we have so far is, in fact, a general data structure for trampolining computations—even pure computations that don’t do any I/O at all! The `StackOverflowError` problem manifests itself in Scala wherever we have a composite function that consists of more function calls than there’s space for on the call stack. This problem is easy to demonstrate:

> We construct a composite function g that consists of 100,000 functions, where each one calls the next.

```scala
scala> val f = (x: Int) => x
val f: Int => Int = <function1>
scala> val g = List.fill(100000)(f).foldLeft(f)(_ compose _)
val g: Int => Int = <function1>
scala> g(42)
java.lang.StackOverflowError
```

It will likely fail for much smaller compositions. Fortunately, we can solve this with our IO monad:

```scala
scala> val f = (x: Int) => IO.Return(x)
val f: Int => IO[Int] = <function1>
```

[<- Page 0394](./page-0394) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0396 ->](./page-0396)
