---
title: "Page 0364"
outline: false
---

# Page 0364

[<- Page 0363](./page-0363) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0365 ->](./page-0365)

> Part 3: Common structures in functional design / Chapter 12: Applicative and traversable functors / 12.7 Uses of Traverse / 12.7.3 Combining traversable structures

## 335 12.7 Uses of Traverse

### 12.7.3 Combining traversable structures

The nature of a traversal necessitates preserving the shape of its argument, which is both its strength and weakness. This is well demonstrated when we try to combine two structures into one. Given `Traverse[F]`, can we combine a value of some type `F[A]` and another of some type `F[B]` into an `F[C]`? We could try using `mapAccum` to write a generic version of `zip`.

Listing 12.12 Combining two different structure types

```scala
extension [A](fa: F[A])
def zip[B](fb: F[B]): F[(A, B)] =
fa.mapAccum(fb.toList):
case (a, Nil) => sys.error("zip: Incompatible shapes.")
case (a, b :: bs) => ((a, b), bs)
.apply(0)
```

This version of `zip` is unable to handle arguments of different shapes. For example, if `F` is `List`, then it can’t handle lists of different lengths. In this implementation, the list `fb` must be at least as long as `fa`. If `F` is `Tree`, then `fb` must have at least the same number of branches as `fa` at every level. We can change the generic `zip` slightly and provide two versions, so the shape of one side or the other is dominant.

Listing 12.13 A more flexible implementation of `zip`

```scala
extension [A](fa: F[A])
def zipL[B](fb: F[B]): F[(A, Option[B])] =
fa.mapAccum(fb.toList):
case (a, Nil) => ((a, None), Nil)
case (a, b :: bs) => ((a, Some(b): Option[B]), bs)
.apply(0)
def zipR[B](fb: F[B]): F[(Option[A], B)] =
fb.mapAccum(fa.toList):
case (b, Nil) => ((None, b), Nil)
case (b, a :: as) => ((Some(a): Option[A], b), as)
.apply(0)
```

These implementations work out nicely for `List` and other sequence types. In the case of `List`, for example, the result of `zipR` will have the shape of the `fb` argument, and it will be padded with `None` on the left if `fb` is longer than `fa`. For types with more interesting structures, like `Tree`, these implementations may not be what we want. Note that in `zipL`, we’re simply flattening the right argument to a `List[B]` and discarding its structure. For `Tree`, this will amount to a preorder traversal of the labels at each node. We’re then zipping this sequence of labels with the values of our left `Tree,` `fa`; we aren’t skipping over nonmatching subtrees. For trees, `zipL` and `zipR` are most useful if we happen to know that both trees share the same shape.

[<- Page 0363](./page-0363) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0365 ->](./page-0365)
