---
title: "Page 0212"
outline: false
---

# Page 0212

[<- Page 0211](./page-0211) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0213 ->](./page-0213)

> Part 2: Functional design and combinator libraries / Chapter 8: Property-based testing / 8.1 A brief tour of property-based testing / 8.1.2 Initial snippets of an API

## 183 8.1 A brief tour of property-based testing

### 8.1.2 Initial snippets of an API

With that said, let’s get started. What data types should we use for our testing library? What primitives should we define, and what might they mean? What laws should our functions satisfy? As before, we can look at a simple example, read off the needed data types and functions, and see what we find. For inspiration, let’s look at the ScalaCheck example we showed earlier:

```scala
val intList = Gen.listOf(Gen.choose(0, 100))
val prop =
Prop.forAll(intList)(ns => ns.reverse.reverse == ns) &&
Prop.forAll(intList)(ns => ns.headOption == ns.reverse.lastOption)
```

Without knowing anything about the implementation of `Gen.choose` or `Gen.listOf`, we can guess that whatever data type they return (let’s call it `Gen`—short for *generator*) must be parametric in some type. That is, `Gen.choose(0,` `100)` probably returns a `Gen[Int]`, and `Gen.listOf` is then a function with the signature `Gen[Int]` `=>` `Gen[List[Int]]`. But since it doesn’t seem like `Gen.listOf` should care about the type of the Gen it receives as input (it would be odd to require separate combinators for creating lists of `Int`, `Double`, `String`, and so on), let’s make it polymorphic:

```scala
def listOf[A](a: Gen[A]): Gen[List[A]]
```

We can learn many things by looking at this signature. Notice what we’re not specifying—the size of the list to generate. For this to be implementable, our generator must therefore either assume or be told the size. Assuming a size seems a bit inflexible since any assumption is unlikely to be appropriate in all contexts. Therefore, it seems generators must be told the size of test cases to generate. We can imagine an API where this is made explicit:

```scala
def listOfN[A](n: Int, a: Gen[A]): Gen[List[A]]
```

This would certainly be a useful combinator, but not having to explicitly specify sizes is powerful as well. It means that whatever function runs the tests has the freedom to choose test case sizes, which opens up the possibility of doing the test case minimization we mentioned earlier. If the sizes are always fixed and specified by the programmer, then the test runner won’t have this flexibility. Keep this concern in mind as we get further along in our design. What about the rest of this example? The `Prop.forAll` function looks interesting; we can see that it accepts a `Gen[List[Int]]` and what looks to be a corresponding predicate: `List[Int]` `=>` `Boolean`. But again, it doesn’t seem like `forAll` should care about the types of the generator and the predicate, as long as they match up. We can express this with the type:

```scala
def forAll[A](a: Gen[A])(f: A => Boolean): Prop
```

[<- Page 0211](./page-0211) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0213 ->](./page-0213)
