---
title: "Page 0138"
outline: false
---

# Page 0138

[<- Page 0137](./page-0137) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0139 ->](./page-0139)

> Part 1: Introduction to functional programming / Chapter 5: Strictness and laziness / 5.5 Conclusion

## 109 5.5 Conclusion

### 5.5 Conclusion

In this chapter, we introduced nonstrictness as a fundamental technique for implementing efficient and modular functional programs. Nonstrictness can be thought of as a technique for recovering some efficiency when writing functional code, but it’s also a much bigger idea—nonstrictness can improve modularity by separating the description of an expression from the how-and-when of its evaluation. Keeping these concerns separate lets us reuse a description in multiple contexts, evaluating different portions of our expression to obtain different results. We weren’t able to do that when description and evaluation were intertwined as they are in strict code. We saw a number of examples of this principle in action over the course of the chapter, and we’ll see many more in the remainder of the book. We’ll switch gears in the next chapter and talk about purely functional approaches to state. This is the last building block needed before we begin exploring the process of functional design.

### Summary

Nonstrictness is a useful technique that allows separation of concerns and improved modularity.

A function is described as nonstrict when it does not evaluate one or more of its arguments. In contrast, a strict function always evaluates its arguments.

The short circuiting `&&` and `||` operators are examples of nonstrict functions; each avoids evaluation of its second argument, depending on the value of the first argument.

In Scala, nonstrict functions are written using by-name parameters, which are indicated by a `=>` in front of the parameter type.

An unevaluated expression is referred to as a thunk, and we can force a thunk to evaluate the expression to a result.

 `LazyList` allows the definition of infinitely long sequences, and various operations on `LazyList`, like `take`, `foldRight`, and `exists`, allow partial evaluation of those infinite sequences.

 `LazyList` is similar to `List`, except the head and tail of `Cons` are evaluated lazily instead of strictly, like in `List.Cons`.

Memoization is the process of caching the result of a computation upon first use.

Smart constructors are functions that create an instance of a data type and provide some additional validation or provide a slightly different type signature than the real data constructors.

Separating the description of a computation from its evaluation provides opportunities for reuse and efficiency.

The `foldRight` function on `LazyList` supports early termination and is subsequently safe for use with infinite lazy lists.

[<- Page 0137](./page-0137) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0139 ->](./page-0139)
