---
title: "Page 0353"
outline: false
---

# Page 0353

[<- Page 0352](./page-0352) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0354 ->](./page-0354)

> Part 3: Common structures in functional design / Chapter 12: Applicative and traversable functors / 12.4 The advantages of applicative functors / 12.4.1 Not all applicative functors are monads

```scala
validBirthdate(birthdate),
validPhone(phone)
)(WebForm(_, _, _))
```

If any or all of the functions produce `Invalid`, then the whole `validateWebForm` method will return all of those failures combined. Note that we used `List[String]` as our error type, allowing us to return multiple errors (this requires a `Monoid[List[A]]` instance, which is provided in the GitHub repository). One downside to this choice of error type is that we have to handle the case where we get an `Invalid(Nil)`. What does it mean for our validation to fail with no errors? Let’s prohibit this from occurring by using a different type for error accumulation. Instead of a `List[String]`, let’s create a list that must have at least one element:

```scala
case class NonEmptyList[+A](head: A, tail: List[A]):
def toList: List[A] = head :: tail
object NonEmptyList:
def apply[A](head: A, tail: A*): NonEmptyList[A] =
NonEmptyList(head, tail.toList)
```

Problem solved? Not quite. Recall that our applicative instance for `Validated` required a monoid instance for the error type. Let’s try to write a `Monoid[NonEmptyList[A]]` instance:

```scala
given nelMonoid: Monoid[NonEmptyList[A]] with
def combine(x: NonEmptyList[A], y: NonEmptyList[A]) =
NonEmptyList(x.head, x.tail ++ y.toList)
val empty: NonEmptyList[A] = ???
```

The `combine` operation is straightforward, but we’ve hit a problem with `empty`. We cannot construct an empty nonempty list, and we have no way of constructing a single element list because we have no way of conjuring a value of type `A` (and even if we could create a singleton list, our instance wouldn’t pass the monoid identity laws). Let’s look more closely at our definition of `Applicative[Validated[E,` `_]]`, though—our implementation used `combine` but not `empty`. Let’s extract a trait from `Monoid` that only contains `combine`. We’ll call this `Semigroup`,4 but we could call it anything:

```scala
trait Semigroup[A]:
def combine(a1: A, a2: A): A
trait Monoid[A] extends Semigroup[A]:
def empty: A
```

4 The name `Semigroup` comes from abstract algebra, which studies *groups*—monoids with an inverse for each element. As the name implies, *semigroups* are weaker than groups and monoids, only requiring the combine operation to be associative and closed on the set. Group theory defines many similar algebraic structures, but semigroups and monoids are the ones seen most in functional programming.

[<- Page 0352](./page-0352) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0354 ->](./page-0354)
