---
title: "Page 0047"
outline: false
---

# Page 0047

[<- Page 0046](./page-0046) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0048 ->](./page-0048)

> Part 1: Introduction to functional programming / Chapter 2: Getting started with functional programming in Scala / 2.1 Introducing Scala the language

This method is declared `private`, which means it can’t be called from any code outside of the `MyProgram` object. This function takes an `Int` and returns a `String`, but note that the return type is not declared. Scala is usually able to infer the return types of methods, so they can be omitted, but it’s generally considered good style to explicitly declare the return types of methods you expect others to use. This method is private to our object, so we omit the type annotation. The body of the method contains two statements, each indented the same number of spaces. A series of statements indented to the same level is called a *block*. Statements are separated by newline characters or semicolons. In this case, we’re using a newline to separate our statements, so a semicolon isn’t necessary. Scala supports surrounding blocks with curly braces, like in Java or C, but these can often be omitted. In this book, we omit curly braces when possible. The first statement in the block declares a `String` named `msg` using the `val` keyword. It’s simply there to give a name to the string value, so we can refer to it again. A `val` is an immutable variable, so inside the body of the `formatAbs` method, the name `msg` will always refer to the same `String` value. The Scala compiler will complain if you try to reassign `msg` to a different value in the same block. Scala supports declaring *mutable* variables with the `var` keyword, though `val` is used more frequently. Remember, a method simply returns the value of its right-hand side, so we don’t need a `return` keyword. In this case, the right-hand side is a block. In Scala, the value of a multistatement block is the same as the value returned by the last expression in the block. Therefore, the result of the `formatAbs` method is just the value returned by the call to `msg.format(x, abs(x))`. Finally, our `printAbs` method is an outer shell that calls into our purely functional core and prints the answer to the console. We’ll sometimes call such methods *proce-*dures* (or *impure functions*), rather than functions, to emphasize the fact that they have side effects:

```scala
@main def printAbs(): Unit =
println(formatAbs(-42))
```

We chose to define `printAbs` with an empty parameter list. Instead, we could have left the parentheses out entirely:

```scala
@main def printAbs: Unit =
println(formatAbs(-42))
```

By convention,2 parentheses are included on procedures (that is, impure functions) that take no parameters. If a method’s parameter list is defined with empty parentheses, then the method must be called with an empty parameter list.

2 The general idea is to signal the presence of side effects via parentheses. This indication of pure versus impure only applies to parameterless methods, though. For methods that take parameters, the parentheses are always required, and not all libraries follow this convention. As a result, some Scala programmers find the convention confusing. We’ll look at other ways to differentiate pure functions from impure functions later in this book.

[<- Page 0046](./page-0046) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0048 ->](./page-0048)
