---
title: "Page 0124"
outline: false
---

# Page 0124

[<- Page 0123](./page-0123) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0125 ->](./page-0125)

> Part 1: Introduction to functional programming / Chapter 5: Strictness and laziness / 5.1 Strict and nonstrict functions

## 95 5.1 Strict and nonstrict functions

In this expression, `map(_` `+` `10)` will produce an intermediate list that then gets passed to `filter(_` `%` `2` `==` `0)`, which in turn constructs a list that gets passed to `map(_` `*` `3)`, which then produces the final list. In other words, each transformation will produce a temporary list that only ever gets used as input to the next transformation and is then immediately discarded. Think about how this program will be evaluated. If we manually produce a trace of its evaluation, the steps would look something like this.

Listing 5.1 Program trace for `List`

```scala
List(1,2,3,4).map(_ + 10).filter(_ % 2 == 0).map(_ * 3)
List(11,12,13,14).filter(_ % 2 == 0).map(_ * 3)
List(12,14).map(_ * 3)
List(36,42)
```

Here we’re showing the result of each substitution performed to evaluate our expression. For example, to go from the first line to the second, we’ve replaced `List(1,2,3,4).map(_` `+` `10)` with `List(11,12,13,14)`, based on the definition of `map`.2 This view makes it clear how the calls to `map` and `filter` each perform their own traversal of the input and allocate lists for the output. Wouldn’t it be nice if we could somehow fuse sequences of transformations like this into a single pass and avoid creating temporary data structures? We could rewrite the code into a `while` loop by hand, but ideally, we’d like to have this done automatically while retaining the same highlevel compositional style. We want to compose our programs using higher-order functions, like `map` and `filter`, instead of writing monolithic loops. It turns out that we can accomplish this kind of automatic loop fusion by using *non-*strictness* (or, less formally, *laziness*). In this chapter, we’ll explain exactly what this means, and we’ll work through the implementation of a lazy list type that fuses sequences of transformations. Although building a *better* list is the motivation for this chapter, we’ll see that nonstrictness is a fundamental technique for improving on the efficiency and modularity of functional programs in general.

### 5.1 Strict and nonstrict functions

Before we get to our example of lazy lists, we need to cover some basics. What do the concepts *strictness* and *nonstrictness* refer to, and how are they expressed in Scala? *Nonstrictness* is a property of a function. To say that a function is nonstrict just means the function may choose not to evaluate one or more of its arguments. In contrast, a *strict* function always evaluates its arguments. Strict functions are the norm in most programming languages, and indeed, most languages only support functions that expect their arguments fully evaluated. Unless we instruct it otherwise, any function definition

2 With program traces like these, it’s often more illustrative to not fully trace the evaluation of every subexpression. In this case, we’ve omitted the full expansion of `List(1,2,3,4).map(_ + 10)`. We could enter the definition of map and trace its execution, but we chose to omit this level of detail here.

[<- Page 0123](./page-0123) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0125 ->](./page-0125)
