---
title: "Page 0313"
outline: false
---

# Page 0313

[<- Page 0312](./page-0312) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0314 ->](./page-0314)

> Part 3: Common structures in functional design / Chapter 11: Monads / 11.1 Functors: Generalizing the map function

### 11.1 Functors: Generalizing the map function

In parts 1 and 2, we implemented several different combinator libraries. In each case, we proceeded by writing a small set of primitives and then a number of combinators defined purely in terms of those primitives, and we noted some similarities between derived combinators across the libraries we wrote. For instance, we implemented a `map` function for each data type to lift a function taking one argument into the context of some data type. For `Gen`, `Parser`, and `Option`, the type signatures were as follows:

```scala
extension [A](ga: Gen[A])
def map[B](f: A => B): Gen[B]
extension [A](pa: Parser[A])
def map[B](f: A => B): Parser[B]
extension [A](oa: Option[A])
def map[B](f: A => B): Option[B]
```

These type signatures differ only in the concrete data type (`Gen`, `Parser`, or `Option`). We can capture the idea of a data type that implements `map` in a Scala trait:

```scala
trait Functor[F[_]]:
extension [A](fa: F[A])
def map[B](f: A => B): F[B]
```

Here weŌĆÖve parameterized the trait on the type constructor, `F[_]`, much like we did with `Foldable` in the previous chapter.2 Instead of picking a particular `F[_]`, like `Gen` or `Parser`, the `Functor` trait is parametric in the choice of `F`. HereŌĆÖs an instance for `List`:

```scala
given listFunctor: Functor[List] with
extension [A](as: List[A])
def map[B](f: A => B): List[B] =
as.map(f)
```

We say that a type constructor like `List` (or `Option` or `F`) is a functor, and the `Functor[F]` instance constitutes proof that `F` is in fact a functor.3

What can we do with this abstraction? As we did in several places throughout this book, we can discover useful functions just by playing with the operations of the interface in a purely algebraic way. You may want to pause here to see what (if any) useful operations you can define only in terms of `map`. LetŌĆÖs look at one example. If we have `F[(A,` `B)]`, where `F` is a functor, we can distribute the `F` over the pair to get `(F[A],` `F[B])`:

2 Recall that a type constructor is applied to a type to produce a type. For example, `List` is a type constructor, not a type. There are no values of the `List` type, but we can apply it to the type `Int` to produce the type `List[Int]`. Likewise, `Parser` can be applied to `String` to yield `Parser[String]`. 3 Note that writing an instance that compiles does not imply the instance is a functor. We need to ensure the instance adheres to various algebraic laws.

[<- Page 0312](./page-0312) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0314 ->](./page-0314)
