---
title: "Page 0179"
outline: false
---

# Page 0179

[<- Page 0178](./page-0178) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0180 ->](./page-0180)

> Part 2: Functional design and combinator libraries / Chapter 7: Purely functional parallelism / 7.1 Choosing data types and functions / 7.1.3 Explicit forking

```scala
map2(
map2(
unit(1),
unit(2))(_ + _),
map2(
unit(3),
unit(4))(_ + _))(_ + _)
```

No matter what data structure we use to store this description, it’ll likely occupy more space than the original list itself. It would be nice if our descriptions were more lightweight. It seems we should make `map2` lazy and have it begin immediate execution of both sides in parallel. This also addresses the problem of giving neither side priority over the other.

### 7.1.3 Explicit forking

Something still doesn’t feel right about our latest choice. Is it always the case that we want to evaluate the two arguments to `map2` in parallel? Probably not. Consider this simple hypothetical example:

```scala
Par.map2(Par.unit(1), Par.unit(1))(_ + _)
```

In this case, we happen to know that the two computations we’re combining will execute so quickly that there isn’t much point in spawning off a separate logical thread to evaluate them, but our API doesn’t give us any way of providing this sort of information. That is, our current API is very *inexplicit* about when computations get forked off the main thread; the programmer doesn’t get to specify where this forking should occur. What if we make the forking more explicit? We can do that by inventing another function, `def` `fork[A](a:` `=>` `Par[A]):` `Par[A]`, which we can take to mean that the given `Par` should be run in a separate logical thread:

```scala
def sum(ints: IndexedSeq[Int]): Par[Int] =
if ints.size <= 1 then
Par.unit(ints.headOption.getOrElse(0))
else
val (l, r) = ints.splitAt(ints.size / 2)
Par.map2(Par.fork(sum(l)), Par.fork(sum(r)))(_ + _)
```

With `fork` we can now make `map2` strict, leaving it up to the programmer to wrap arguments if they wish. A function like `fork` solves the problem of instantiating our parallel computations too strictly, but more fundamentally, it puts the parallelism explicitly under programmer control. We’re addressing two concerns here: The first is that we need some way to indicate that the results of the two parallel tasks should be combined. Separate from this, we have the choice of whether a particular task should be performed asynchronously. By keeping these concerns separate, we avoid having any sort of global policy for parallelism attached to `map2` and other operations we write,

[<- Page 0178](./page-0178) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0180 ->](./page-0180)
