---
title: "Page 0467"
outline: false
---

# Page 0467

[<- Page 0466](./page-0466) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0468 ->](./page-0468)

> Part 4: Effects and I/O / Chapter 15: Stream processing and incremental I/O / 15.3 Extensible pulls and streams / 15.3.3 Ensuring resource safety

```scala
case Some(p) => p.open(finalizer)
State.Closed() -> next
.flatten
```

We have two cases to handle: when `open` is called on an `Open` scope and when it is called on a `Closed` scope. If the scope is open, then we first construct a new scope for the new finalizer, and we then compute a new `Open` state that references the new scope in its subscopes. Recall that the signature of `modify` allows us to return an arbitrary value along with the updated state; here we return an `F[Scope[F]]` as that arbitrary value. Ignoring the `Closed` case for a moment, we have a `state.modify(…)` that returns an `F[F[Scope[F]]`, which we `flatten` into an `F[Scope[F]]`. This pattern is extensible to any state machine we can imagine. We store the current state in a `Ref` and perform transitions in terms of `ref.modify(f).flatten`, where `f` computes the next state from the current state and returns an action to evaluate after successful modification of the `Ref`’s state. Returning to the `Closed` case, we could choose to make opening a subscope on a closed scope an error. Instead, we’ll propagate the open request to the parent scope. That scope may be closed as well, which will result in recursive propagation up the tree until we either encounter an open scope or we reach the root. We only signal an error if we reach the root without encountering an open scope. The `close` operation is implemented in a similar fashion:

```scala
def close: F[Unit] =
state
.modify:
case State.Open(finalizer, subscopes) =>
val finalizers = (subscopes.reverseIterator.map(_.close) ++
Iterator(finalizer)).toList
def go(rem: List[F[Unit]], error: Option[Throwable]): F[Unit] =
rem match
case Nil => error match
case None => F.unit(())
case Some(t) => F.raiseError(t)
case hd :: tl =>
hd.attempt.flatMap(res =>
go(tl, error orElse res.toEither.swap.toOption))
State.Closed() -> go(finalizers, None)
case State.Closed() => State.Closed() -> F.unit(())
.flatten
```

Calling close on an open scope transitions the scope’s state to `Closed`. We compute an action that closes all subscopes and then runs the finalizer of the original scope. We have to be careful to reverse the order of the subscopes to ensure finalizers are run in a stack-like fashion (i.e., finalizers must be run in *last in, first out* order). We also have to be careful to run all finalizers, even if errors occur. We can’t just traverse the list of actions; otherwise, we’d short-circuit on the first error.

[<- Page 0466](./page-0466) | [Pages index](./) | [Page 0468 ->](./page-0468)
